Extreme acidophiles thrive in harsh environments characterized by acidic pH, high concentrations of dissolved metals and high osmolarity. Most of these microorganisms are chemolithoautotrophs that obtain energy from low redox potential sources, such as the oxidation of ferrous ions. Under these conditions, the mechanisms that maintain homeostasis of proteins (proteostasis), as the main organic components of the cells, are of utmost importance. Thus, the analysis of protein chaperones is critical for understanding how these organisms deal with proteostasis under such environmental conditions. In this work, using a bioinformatics approach, we performed a comparative genomic analysis of the genes encoding classical, periplasmic and stress chaperones, and the protease systems. The analysis included 35 genomes from iron- or sulfur-oxidizing autotrophic, heterotrophic, and mixotrophic acidophilic bacteria. The results showed that classical ATP-dependent chaperones, mostly folding chaperones, are widely distributed, although they are sub-represented in some groups. Acidophilic bacteria showed redundancy of genes coding for the ATP-independent holdase chaperones RidA and Hsp20. In addition, a systematically high redundancy of genes encoding periplasmic chaperones like HtrA and YidC was also detected. In the same way, the proteolytic ATPase complexes ClpPX and Lon presented redundancy and broad distribution. The presence of genes that encoded protein variants was noticeable. In addition, genes for chaperones and protease systems were clustered within the genomes, suggesting common regulation of these activities. Finally, some genes were differentially distributed between bacteria as a function of the autotrophic or heterotrophic character of their metabolism. These results suggest that acidophiles possess an abundant and flexible proteostasis network that protects proteins in organisms living in energy-limiting and extreme environmental conditions. Therefore, our results provide a means for understanding the diversity and significance of proteostasis mechanisms in extreme acidophilic bacteria.