1. ISME J. 2022 May;16(5):1348-1362. doi: 10.1038/s41396-021-01177-5. Epub 2022
Jan  5.

Soils and sediments host Thermoplasmata archaea encoding novel copper membrane 
monooxygenases (CuMMOs).

Diamond S(1)(2), Lavy A(3), Crits-Christoph A(4), Matheus Carnevali PB(3), 
Sharrar A(3), Williams KH(5), Banfield JF(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. 
sdiamond@berkeley.edu.
(2)Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA, USA. sdiamond@berkeley.edu.
(3)Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(5)Climate and Ecosystem Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(6)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. 
jbanfield@berkeley.edu.
(7)Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA, USA. jbanfield@berkeley.edu.
(8)Department of Environmental Science, Policy and Management, University of 
California, Berkeley, CA, USA. jbanfield@berkeley.edu.
(9)School of Earth Sciences, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. 
jbanfield@berkeley.edu.

Copper membrane monooxygenases (CuMMOs) play critical roles in the global carbon 
and nitrogen cycles. Organisms harboring these enzymes perform the first, and 
rate limiting, step in aerobic oxidation of ammonia, methane, or other simple 
hydrocarbons. Within archaea, only organisms in the order Nitrososphaerales 
(Thaumarchaeota) encode CuMMOs, which function exclusively as ammonia 
monooxygenases. From grassland and hillslope soils and aquifer sediments, we 
identified 20 genomes from distinct archaeal species encoding divergent CuMMO 
sequences. These archaea are phylogenetically clustered in a previously unnamed 
Thermoplasmatota order, herein named the Ca. Angelarchaeales. The CuMMO proteins 
in Ca. Angelarchaeales are more similar in structure to those in 
Nitrososphaerales than those of bacteria, and contain all functional residues 
required for general monooxygenase activity. Ca. Angelarchaeales genomes are 
significantly enriched in blue copper proteins (BCPs) relative to sibling 
lineages, including plastocyanin-like electron carriers and divergent nitrite 
reductase-like (nirK) 2-domain cupredoxin proteins co-located with electron 
transport machinery. Ca. Angelarchaeales also encode significant capacity for 
peptide/amino acid uptake and degradation and share numerous electron transport 
mechanisms with the Nitrososphaerales. Ca. Angelarchaeales are detected at high 
relative abundance in some of the environments where their genomes originated 
from. While the exact substrate specificities of the novel CuMMOs identified 
here have yet to be determined, activity on ammonia is possible given their 
metabolic and ecological context. The identification of an archaeal CuMMO 
outside of the Nitrososphaerales significantly expands the known diversity of 
CuMMO enzymes in archaea and suggests previously unaccounted organisms 
contribute to critical global nitrogen and/or carbon cycling functions.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41396-021-01177-5
PMCID: PMC9038741
PMID: 34987183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.