1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2010 Dec;76(23):7775-84. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01122-10.
Epub  2010 Oct 1.

Mixed-culture transcriptome analysis reveals the molecular basis of 
mixed-culture growth in Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus bulgaricus.

Sieuwerts S(1), Molenaar D, van Hijum SA, Beerthuyzen M, Stevens MJ, Janssen PW, 
Ingham CJ, de Bok FA, de Vos WM, van Hylckama Vlieg JE.

Author information:
(1)Top Institute Food and Nutrition, P.O. Box 557, 6700 AN Wageningen, 
Netherlands.

Many food fermentations are performed using mixed cultures of lactic acid 
bacteria. Interactions between strains are of key importance for the performance 
of these fermentations. Yogurt fermentation by Streptococcus thermophilus and 
Lactobacillus bulgaricus (basonym, Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus) 
is one of the best-described mixed-culture fermentations. These species are 
believed to stimulate each other's growth by the exchange of metabolites such as 
folic acid and carbon dioxide. Recently, postgenomic studies revealed that an 
upregulation of biosynthesis pathways for nucleotides and sulfur-containing 
amino acids is part of the global physiological response to mixed-culture growth 
in S. thermophilus, but an in-depth molecular analysis of mixed-culture growth 
of both strains remains to be established. We report here the application of 
mixed-culture transcriptome profiling and a systematic analysis of the effect of 
interaction-related compounds on growth, which allowed us to unravel the 
molecular responses associated with batch mixed-culture growth in milk of S. 
thermophilus CNRZ1066 and L. bulgaricus ATCC BAA-365. The results indicate that 
interactions between these bacteria are primarily related to purine, amino acid, 
and long-chain fatty acid metabolism. The results support a model in which 
formic acid, folic acid, and fatty acids are provided by S. thermophilus. 
Proteolysis by L. bulgaricus supplies both strains with amino acids but is 
insufficient to meet the biosynthetic demands for sulfur and branched-chain 
amino acids, as becomes clear from the upregulation of genes associated with 
these amino acids in mixed culture. Moreover, genes involved in iron uptake in 
S. thermophilus are affected by mixed-culture growth, and genes coding for 
exopolysaccharide production were upregulated in both organisms in mixed culture 
compared to monocultures. The confirmation of previously identified responses in 
S. thermophilus using a different strain combination demonstrates their generic 
value. In addition, the postgenomic analysis of the responses of L. bulgaricus 
to mixed-culture growth allows a deeper understanding of the ecology and 
interactions of this important industrial food fermentation process.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01122-10
PMCID: PMC2988612
PMID: 20889781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]