1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2021 Sep 10;87(19):e0134421. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01344-21.  Epub 2021 Jul 21.

Exploration of Social Spreading Reveals That This Behavior Is Prevalent among 
Pedobacter and Pseudomonas fluorescens Isolates and That There Are Variations in 
the Induction of the Phenotype.

McCully LM(#)(1), Graslie J(#)(1), McGraw AR(1), Bitzer AS(1), Sigurbjörnsdóttir 
AM(2), Vilhelmsson O(2), Silby MW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Dartmouthgrid.266686.a, 
Dartmouth, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Natural Resource Sciences, University of Akureyri, Akureyri, 
Iceland.
(#)Contributed equally

Within soil, bacteria are found in multispecies communities, where interactions 
can lead to emergent community properties. Studying bacteria in a social context 
is critical for investigating community-level functions. We previously showed 
that cocultured Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf0-1 and Pedobacter sp. V48 engage in 
interspecies social spreading (ISS) on a hard agar surface, a behavior which 
required close contact and depended on the nutritional environment. Here, we 
investigate whether social spreading is widespread among P. fluorescens and 
Pedobacter isolates and whether the requirements for interaction vary. We find 
that this phenotype is not restricted to the interaction between P. fluorescens 
Pf0-1 and Pedobacter sp. V48 but is a prevalent behavior found in one clade in 
the P. fluorescens group and two clades in the Pedobacter genus. We show that 
the interaction with certain Pedobacter isolates occurred without close contact, 
indicating induction of spreading by a putative diffusible signal. As with ISS 
by Pf0-1+V48, the motility of interacting pairs is influenced by the 
environment, with no spreading behaviors (or induction of motility) observed 
under high nutrient conditions. While Pf0-1+V48 require low nutrient but high 
NaCl conditions, in the broader range of interacting pairs, the high salt 
influence was variable. The prevalence of motility phenotypes observed here and 
found within the literature indicates that community-induced locomotion in 
general, and social spreading in particular, is likely important within the 
environment. It is crucial that we continue to study microbial interactions and 
their emergent properties to gain a fuller understanding of the functions of 
microbial communities. IMPORTANCE Interspecies social spreading (ISS) is an 
emergent behavior observed when Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf0-1 and Pedobacter sp. 
V48 interact, during which both species move together across a surface. 
Importantly, this environment does not permit the movement of either individual 
species. This group behavior suggests that communities of microbes can function 
in ways not predictable by knowledge of the individual members. Here, we have 
asked whether ISS is widespread and thus potentially of importance in soil 
microbial communities. The significance of this research is the demonstration 
that surface spreading behaviors are not unique to the Pf0-1-V48 interaction but 
rather is a more widespread phenomenon observed among members of distinct clades 
of both P. fluorescens and Pedobacter isolates. Furthermore, we identify 
differences in mechanisms of signaling and nutritional requirements for ISS. 
Emergent traits resulting from bacterial interactions are widespread, and their 
characterization is necessary for a complete understanding of microbial 
community function.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01344-21
PMCID: PMC8432519
PMID: 34288708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]