1. mSystems. 2025 Apr 22;10(4):e0020025. doi: 10.1128/msystems.00200-25. Epub
2025  Mar 28.

Phages-bacteria interactions underlying the dynamics of 
polyhydroxyalkanoate-producing mixed microbial cultures via meta-omics study.

Yao J(1)(2), Zeng Y(1)(2), Hong X(3), Wang M(4), Zhang Q(4), Chen Y(2)(5), Gou 
M(1)(2)(6), Xia Z-Y(1)(2), Tang Y-Q(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Architecture and Environment, Sichuan University, , Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China.
(2)Sichuan Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Organic Wastes 
Valorization, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Sinopec Shanghai Engineering Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China.
(4)Sinopec (Dalian) Research Institute of Petroleum and Petrochemicals Co. Ltd., 
Dalian, Liaoning, China.
(5)Institute for Disaster Management and Reconstruction, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(6)Engineering Research Centre of Alternative Energy Materials and Devices, 
Ministry of Education, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

The dynamics of the structure of polyhydroxyalkanoate-producing mixed microbial 
cultures (PHA-MMCs) during enrichment and maintenance is an unsolved problem. 
The effect of phages has been proposed as a cause of dynamic changes in 
community structure, but evidence is lacking. To address this question, five 
PHA-MMCs were enriched, and biological samples were sampled temporally to study 
the interactions between phage and bacterial members by combining metagenomics 
and metatranscriptomics. A total of 963 metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) and 
4,294 phage operational taxonomic units (pOTUs) were assembled from bulk 
metagenomic data. The dynamic changes in the structure of phage and bacterial 
communities were remarkably consistent. Structural equation modeling analysis 
showed that phages could infect and lyse dominant species to vacate ecological 
niches for other species, resulting in a community succession state in which 
dominant species alternated. Seven key auxiliary metabolic genes (AMGs), phaC, 
fadJ, acs, ackA, phbB, acdAB, and fadD, potentially contributing to PHA 
synthesis were identified from phage sequences. Importantly, these AMGs were 
transcribed, indicating that they were in an active expression state. The 
meta-analysis provides the first catalog of phages in PHA-MMCs and the AMGs they 
carry, as well as how they affect the dynamic changes in bacterial communities. 
This study provides a reference for subsequent studies on understanding and 
regulating the microbial community structure of open microbial 
systems.IMPORTANCEThe synthesis of biodegradable plastic PHA from organic waste 
through mixed microbial cultures (PHA-MMCs), at extremely low cost, has the 
potential for expanded production. However, the dynamics of dominant species in 
PHA-MMCs are poorly understood. Our results demonstrate for the first time the 
impact of phages on the structure of bacterial communities in the PHA-MMCs. 
There are complex interactions between the PHA producers (e.g., Azomonas, 
Paracoccus, and Thauera) and phages (e.g., Casadabanvirus and unclassified 
Hendrixvirinae). Phage communities can regulate the activity and structure of 
bacterial communities. In addition, the AMGs related to PHA synthesis may 
hitchhike during phage-host infection cycles, enabling their dissemination 
across bacterial communities, and phages may act as a critical genetic reservoir 
for bacterial members, facilitating access to PHA synthesis-related functional 
traits. This study highlights the impact of phages on bacterial community 
structure, suggesting that phages have the potential to be used as a tool for 
better controlling the microbial community structure of PHA-MMCs.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.00200-25
PMCID: PMC12013262
PMID: 40152616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

===== OPEN-ACCESS FULL TEXT (Europe PMC PMC12013262) =====

pmc mSystems mSystems 3105 msys 101680636 msystems mSystems 2379-5077 American Society for Microbiology (ASM) PMC12013262 PMC12013262.1 12013262 12013262 40152616 10.1128/msystems.00200-25 msystems00200-25 msystems.00200-25 1 Research Article open-peer-review Open Peer Review environmental-microbiology Environmental Microbiology Phages-bacteria interactions underlying the dynamics of polyhydroxyalkanoate-producing mixed microbial cultures via meta-omics study https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3121-4223 Yao Jian 
1

2
 Data curation Formal analysis Methodology Writing – original draft Zeng Yan 
1

2
 Methodology Hong Xia 
3
 Funding acquisition Wang Meng 
4
 Funding acquisition Zhang Quan 
4
 Funding acquisition Chen Yating 
2

5
 Methodology Gou Min 
1

2

6
 Methodology Xia Zi-Yuan 
1

2
 Methodology https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6872-1099 Tang Yue-Qin 
1

2
 Funding acquisition Supervision Writing – review and editing tangyq@scu.edu.cn 1 College of Architecture and Environment, Sichuan University617246https://ror.org/011ashp19, , Chengdu , Sichuan , China 2 Sichuan Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Organic Wastes Valorization, Chengdu , Sichuan , China 3 Sinopec Shanghai Engineering Co. Ltd., Shanghai , China 4 Sinopec (Dalian) Research Institute of Petroleum and Petrochemicals Co. Ltd., Dalian , Liaoning , China 5 Institute for Disaster Management and Reconstruction, Sichuan University12530https://ror.org/011ashp19, Chengdu , Sichuan , China 6 Engineering Research Centre of Alternative Energy Materials and Devices, Ministry of Education, Chengdu , Sichuan , China Editor Ma Liyuan China University of Geosciences, Wuhan , Hubei , China Address correspondence to Yue-Qin Tang, tangyq@scu.edu.cn The authors declare no conflict of interest. 4 2025 28 3 2025 10 4487008 e00200-25 
 10 2 2025 
 26 2 2025 
 28 03 2025 23 04 2025 23 04 2025 Copyright © 2025 Yao et al. 2025 Yao et al. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license . ABSTRACT The dynamics of the structure of polyhydroxyalkanoate-producing mixed microbial cultures (PHA-MMCs) during enrichment and maintenance is an unsolved problem. The effect of phages has been proposed as a cause of dynamic changes in community structure, but evidence is lacking. To address this question, five PHA-MMCs were enriched, and biological samples were sampled temporally to study the interactions between phage and bacterial members by combining metagenomics and metatranscriptomics. A total of 963 metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) and 4,294 phage operational taxonomic units (pOTUs) were assembled from bulk metagenomic data. The dynamic changes in the structure of phage and bacterial communities were remarkably consistent. Structural equation modeling analysis showed that phages could infect and lyse dominant species to vacate ecological niches for other species, resulting in a community succession state in which dominant species alternated. Seven key auxiliary metabolic genes (AMGs), phaC, fadJ, acs, ackA, phbB, acdAB, and fadD, potentially contributing to PHA synthesis were identified from phage sequences. Importantly, these AMGs were transcribed, indicating that they were in an active expression state. The meta-analysis provides the first catalog of phages in PHA-MMCs and the AMGs they carry, as well as how they affect the dynamic changes in bacterial communities. This study provides a reference for subsequent studies on understanding and regulating the microbial community structure of open microbial systems. IMPORTANCE The synthesis of biodegradable plastic PHA from organic waste through mixed microbial cultures (PHA-MMCs), at extremely low cost, has the potential for expanded production. However, the dynamics of dominant species in PHA-MMCs are poorly understood. Our results demonstrate for the first time the impact of phages on the structure of bacterial communities in the PHA-MMCs. There are complex interactions between the PHA producers (e.g., Azomonas, Paracoccus, and Thauera) and phages (e.g., Casadabanvirus and unclassified Hendrixvirinae). Phage communities can regulate the activity and structure of bacterial communities. In addition, the AMGs related to PHA synthesis may hitchhike during phage-host infection cycles, enabling their dissemination across bacterial communities, and phages may act as a critical genetic reservoir for bacterial members, facilitating access to PHA synthesis-related functional traits. This study highlights the impact of phages on bacterial community structure, suggesting that phages have the potential to be used as a tool for better controlling the microbial community structure of PHA-MMCs. KEYWORDS polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) mixed microbial cultures (MMCs) community assembly microbial community structure dynamics phages-bacteria interactions phages-host dynamics auxiliary metabolic genes (AMGs) 
China Petrochemical Corporationhttp://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100010824
 No. 421063-10 
 Zeng Yan 
 Hong Xia 
 Wang Meng 
 Zhang Quan 
 Chen Yating 
 Gou Min 
 Xia Zi-Yuan 
 Tang Yue-Qin 
 pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY cover-date April 2025 INTRODUCTION Mixed microbial cultures (MMCs), which use complex microbial communities composed of multiple microorganisms as biocatalysts, have achieved significant achievements in pollutant removal ( 1 ) and waste utilization ( 2 ). Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) production by MMCs is a prime example. Due to outstanding biodegradability and material properties, PHAs have the potential to replace petroleum-based plastics in the face of increasing plastic pollution and fossil resource depletion ( 3 ). The high cost of PHA production with pure culture techniques has limited the widespread use of PHA materials ( 4 ). As a result, PHA production with MMC techniques that can utilize inexpensive waste biomass has been proposed and is more likely to facilitate commercial scale-up of PHA production due to its low production costs ( 4 ). Currently, the process for the production of PHAs by MMCs using complex waste biomass has three main steps ( 5 ). The process includes the following: (i) acid production: producing short-chain carboxylic acids (SCCAs, such as acetate, propionate, butyrate, valerate, and lactate) that serve as substrates of PHAs production by anaerobic fermentation; (ii) MMC enrichment: enriching microbial communities with PHAs-synthesizing capacity from activated sludge by applying selective pressure; (iii) PHAs accumulation: the maximum PHAs accumulation of enriched MMCs using SCCAs. Of these, the second step is the most important in the process. Nowadays, aerobic dynamic feeding (ADF) is the main strategy to enrich PHA-MMCs ( 6 ). Alternating cycles of the feast (carbon rich) and famine (carbon poor) in the ADF provide selection pressure. Because PHA producers can accumulate intracellular PHAs as a backup carbon source during the feast phase, they are better able to gain a competitive advantage during the famine phase ( 7 ). However, the dominant species in enriched microbial communities continue to change even under stable maintenance conditions, and this species turnover cannot be fully explained by interspecific competition ( 7 ). In recent years, researchers have begun to uncover the effects of phages on the structure and function of microbial communities in natural environments (e.g., deep-sea sediment [ 8 ] and soil [ 9 ]) and engineered systems (e.g., municipal wastewater treatment plants [ 10 – 12 ]). Virulent phages hijack the hosts to produce progeny and eventually lyse the host, and host cell debris fuels other microorganisms, which can directly affect the structure of microbial communities ( 13 , 14 ). In addition, both virulent and temperate phages can manipulate host metabolism by reprogramming host metabolic pathways or expressing auxiliary metabolic genes (AMGs) to influence the function of microbial communities. For example, in the ocean, many AMGs are involved in photosynthesis ( 15 ), the pentose phosphate pathway ( 16 ), nitrogen metabolism ( 17 ), and sulfur metabolism ( 18 ). Given that PHA-MMCs are cultivated in open systems, the bacterial communities within may also be influenced by phages. In light of the above considerations, we hypothesize that phages constitute a factor affecting the structure of bacterial communities in PHA-MMCs and may carry auxiliary metabolic genes associated with PHA synthesis. In this study, we set out to test this hypothesis in five PHA-MMCs enriched with different SCCAs as the sole carbon sources. A total of 30 biological samples over the time scale were collected for the metagenomics and metatranscriptomics analyses. Our study aimed to explore the following questions: (i) identification of phages in PHA-MMCs and characterization of their interactions with bacteria; (ii) whether and how phages affect the structure of the bacterial community; and (iii) whether phages encode PHA synthesis-related AMGs and whether these AMGs are transcriptionally active. A total of 4,294 pOTUs were recovered, and the structural equation modeling (SEM) was used to discuss the effects of phages on the activity of the bacterial microorganisms and the microbial community structure. Host prediction of APC and prediction of host-encoded antiphage defense systems were performed to explore the characteristics of phage-host interactions during enrichment and maintenance processes. AMGs involved in PHA synthesis in phages were identified, and the complementary metatranscriptome analysis was conducted to verify the active expression of AMGs, which supported the new discovery of active phage-mediated PHA biosynthesis function. It is the first study to elucidate the effect of phages on the community structure and function of PHA-MMCs. The results guide subsequent studies to construct efficient and robust PHA-MMCs. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Overview of the bacterial and phage communities in the PHA-MMCs To investigate phage diversity during the enrichment and maintenance process of PHA-MMCs, as well as the effect of phages on the microbial structure, five PHA-MMCs were enriched with acetate, propionate, butyrate, valerate, and lactate as the sole carbon source, respectively, and continuously cultured for a period of 145 days ( Fig. 1A ). The PHA synthesizing capacity of the five PHA-MMCs was rapidly increased in the first 17 days (enrichment phase) and remained stable thereafter (maintenance phase). The butyrate-enriched PHA-MMCs had the highest PHA synthesizing capacity, followed by the acetate, lactate, and valerate-enriched PHA-MMCs, and the lowest being the propionate-enriched PHA-MMCs ( Fig. 2A ). The higher energy cost may be one reason for the low efficiency of PHA synthesis using propionate as the carbon source. Two acetyl-CoA and one NADPH need to be input to convert one molecule of propionate into one molecule of (R)-3-hydroxyvaleryl-CoA, which is much higher than the energy input of the butyrate or valerate conversion pathway ( 19 ). Fig 1 Experimental design and analytical processes. (A) The five enriched polyhydroxyalkanoate-producing mixed microbial cultures (PHA-MMCs). (B) The distribution of biological samples collected. (C) The analysis processes of meta-omics data. PHA-MMC selection, sample collection timeline, and metagenomic workflow. Reactors with different carbon sources undergo periodic sampling. DNA/RNA extraction, sequencing, and analysis identify microbial and viral interactions. Fig 2 The overview of bacterial and phage communities. (A) The maximum PHA accumulation content (wt%) of PHA-MMCs in each reactor. (B) The top 10 bacterial genera (relative abundance) in each reactor. (C) Distribution of pOTU sequence lengths. (D) The percentage of pOTUs of different qualities. (E) The top 10 pOTU genera (relative abundance) in each reactor. PHA accumulation, bacterial and phage community, and metagenome statistics. Growth curves plot enrichment and maintenance phases. Heatmaps of microbial diversity across reactors. Bar and pie charts summarize contig size distribution and genome quality. To further understand the dynamics of the bacterial and phage community structure of PHA-MMCs and the interactions between them, 30 time-sequenced samples were collected and subjected to meta-omics sequencing and analysis during the enrichment and maintenance of MMCs ( Fig. 1B and C ). From these metagenomes, 963 metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) with completeness ≥70% and contamination ≤10% were recovered by de novo assembly and binning. After clustering by dRep ( 20 ), 711 unique MAGs were obtained, of which 112 were from Reactor A, 144 from Reactor B, 179 from Reactor C, 141 from Reactor D, and 135 from Reactor E. Among five reactors, the bacterial MAGs belong to Proteobacteria (n = 69, 86, 98, 93, and 83 in Reactors A, B, C, D, and E, respectively) and Bacteroidota (n = 25, 38, 46, 25, and 28 in Reactors A, B, C, D, and E, respectively) dominated in the bacterial communities ( Fig. S1 ). The distribution of these MAGs in the different genera is shown in Fig. S2 to S6 . In general, Azoarcus, Paracoccus, Azomonas, Thauera, and Brevundimonas were the dominant genera which were consistent with previous studies that adopted the same enrichment strategy using activated sludge as inoculum seed ( 7 , 21 , 22 ) ( Fig. 2B ). However, the dominant genus was not the same in different reactors. For example, Azoarcus was dominant in Reactors A and B, rather than in Reactors C and D, and Thauera dominated in Reactor E, rather than in others, which might be due to the fact that different bacteria preferred different organic acids ( 21 , 23 – 25 ). The phage sequences were assembled and identified from bulk metagenomes containing sequences of diverse origins, which have been widely used to study viral communities in soil ( 26 ), deep-sea sediment ( 8 ), and deep-sea hydrothermal vents ( 27 ). In this study, VirSorter2 ( 28 ) and VirFinder ( 29 ) were used to identify assembled phage contigs (APCs) from bulk metagenomes, resulting in 5719 putative APCs (Contigs ≥ 5 kb ( 30 )). These APCs were then clustered at 95% identity and 80% coverage to generate 4294 pOTUs. The size of these pOTUs ranged from 5,001 to 496,772 bp, in which six pOTUs were larger than 200 kb and possibly corresponded to giant phages ( Fig. 2C ). The quality assessment of pOTUs was conducted by checkv ( 31 ), and 576 pOTUs (13.42%) were of medium quality and above, including 18 complete pOTUs (0.42%), high-quality pOTUs (4.24%) and medium-quality pOTUs (8.76%) ( Fig. 2D ). VirFinder and VirSorter2 are powerful tools for identifying phage sequences from metagenomes and have been used in many studies ( 32 ). The low proportion of high-quality phage sequences was also reported in previous studies, which may be due to insufficient understanding of the extremely complex virosphere ( 10 , 30 ). The VirFinder uses the frequencies of DNA k-mers found in known viral genomes to train machine-learning classifiers to identify phage sequences ( 29 ). VirSorter2 uses domain percentages, gene content features, and key homology genes in a tree-based machine learning framework to classify phage reads ( 28 ). Compared with VirFinder, VirSorter2 is more advanced in that it moves beyond a single model to represent the virosphere for phage identification. However, VirFinder and VirSorter2 are heavily dependent on existing virus databases. The incompleteness of existing bacteriophage databases limits the output of better-quality phage identification results. The life cycle of pOTUs was predicted based on the protein composition and associations by PhaTYP ( 33 ). Among these 4,294 pOTUs, 2,276 pOTUs were classified as temperate phages (53%) while 1,741 pOTUs were classified as virulent phages (40.5%). The average abundance of temperate phages identified was 1.7 times that of virulent phages. This may be due to the fact that temperate phages integrating into host genomes can be easily assembled from bulk metagenomic data ( 8 ). In addition, the lack of complete annotation of lytic-specific genes and the incomplete assembly of phage genomes also could lead to the underestimation of potent phage signals. The taxonomy of pOTUs was classified by PhaGCN2, which is a GCN-based model and learns the species masking feature via a deep learning classifier ( 34 ). Totally, 2,007 pOTUs (46.7%) were classified at the phylum level, with the Uroviricota (n = 1,902) as the most dominant phylum in each reactor ( Fig. S1 ). Zhang et al. studied the phages in activated sludge from three different sewage treatment plants, using three methods (PhaGCN2, CAT, and BLASTn to the IMG/VR database) for taxonomic classification, and the results also showed that Uroviricota was the most prevalent phylum ( 11 ). Some pOTUs could not be classified, due in part to the fact that the current viral phylogeny is still understudied, which also occurs in other studies ( 30 , 35 ). Among the Uroviricota, 51 genera were identified for pOTUs, and the Casadabanvirus (n = 740, a genus in the class Caudoviricetes) was the most dominant genus of the class Caudoviricetes, followed by the three unclassified genera in Hendrixvirinae (subfamily), Casjensviridae (family), and Peduoviridae (family), respectively ( Fig. 2E ). This was consistent with the results of the study of Yuan et al. in which, phages in sludge from 32 wastewater treatment plants were taxonomically classified using vConTACT ( 10 ). Consistent with the bacterial community, the abundance of members in the phage community changes dynamically over time ( Tables S1 to S5 ). The mean rank shift (MRS) ( 36 ) was used to quantitatively characterize this dynamic change of phage and bacterial communities ( Fig. S7 ). In short, the higher the MRS value is, the bigger the fluctuations in dominant taxa. In these communities, the MRS of phages at adjacent time points ranged from 400 to 1,000, which was much higher than that of bacterial members. This was partly because the number and diversity of phages far outstripped bacterial members in PHA-MMCs. In addition, there was a positive correlation between the MRS of phages and bacterial communities (Spearman’s rho and P-value in Reactor A: 0.89 and 0.037; Reactor B: 0.65 and 0.1; Reactor C: 0.81 and 0.04; Reactor D: 0.87 and 0.02; Reactor E: 0.37 and 0.2). The positive correlation in Reactors B and E was not significant. This may be due to that MRS does not consider the loss and gain of members during community succession. In addition, the time-lagged association between changes in the number of phages and bacterial hosts may also contribute to this MRS insignificant positive correlation. Evidence that phages shape bacterial communities To show the differences among the community structure of bacterial and phage communities in the different samples, the Bray-Curtis distance among samples was calculated and sorted by principal co-ordinates analysis (PCoA) ( Fig. 3A and B ). Sample points in each reactor did not cluster together during the late stages of maintenance (days 65, 68, and 145), suggesting that the bacterial community structure reached alternative states during maintenance, even when deterministic selection pressure was applied (alternating satiation and starvation phases). In addition, the structure of the phage communities in different samples also did not converge. Fig 3 Temporal dynamics of bacterial and phage communities The PCoA of bacterial communities (A) and phage communities (B). The “S” denotes activated sludge inoculum and the numbers indicate the days of sampling. (C) The Bray-Curtis community dissimilarity through days for bacterial (solid line) and phage (dashed line) communities. The dissimilarity illustrates the change in community composition from the previous time point. Spearman’s correlation test was tested between the dissimilarity of bacterial and viral communities. (D) Path diagram of SEM showing the effect of phage communities on bacterial communities. Composition is represented by the PC1 from the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity-based principal coordinate analyses. The α diversity is represented by the Chao1 index. The phage abundance is the sum of the abundance value of each phage in the sample based on the metagenomic data. The bacterial activity is the sum of the activity value of each bacterial MAG in the sample based on the metatranscriptomic data. Numbers adjacent to the arrows are standardized path coefficients (r). “*” means the significant index (chi-squared test) P ≤ 0.05 and “***” means the significant index P ≤ 0.001. R2 represents the proportion of variance explained for every dependent variable in the model. NMDS plots of bacterial and phage communities, Bray-Curtis dissimilarity across reactors, and network analysis of microbial interactions. Significant correlations between bacterial diversity, viral abundance, and composition are highlighted. To investigate whether the dynamics of bacterial community structure could be mirrored in phage communities, these temporal changes in community structure were quantified by Bray-Curtis community dissimilarity values, and the Spearman’s rho between bacterial and phage communities was calculated ( Fig. 3C ). The Bray-Curtis community dissimilarity values describe the degree of difference between the community structures of temporally adjacent samples; the larger the Bray-Curtis community dissimilarity value, the greater the difference. There was a significant positive relationship between the bacterial and phage communities shifts, and their dynamics mirrored well (Spearman’s rho in Reactors A, B, C, D and E = 0.95, 0.77, 0.87, 0.99, and 0.8). These strong correlations may indicate that the bacterial and viral communities were constantly changing and that viral predation was occurring. The encounter ratio with the corresponding phage would be greatly increased by an increase in host abundance, which promotes the proliferation of phages ( 37 , 38 ). As the virulent phages could hijack hosts for self-replication and then lyse the host cells, under phage predation, the number of hosts may gradually decrease, which negatively affects phage proliferation, leading to a subsequent decrease in the abundance of phages. However, more evidence is needed to prove phage predation on hosts, which is the key to showing that phage is one of the driving forces in changing the compositional structures of bacterial communities described above. To solve this problem, the SEM was used to discern the causality and quantify the effects of the drivers ( Fig. 3D ). The significant positive correlation (r: 0.8, P ≤ 0.001) between phage community composition and bacterial community composition was consistent with the above analyses ( Fig. 3C ), as phages were dependent on the host for survival. Importantly, there was a significant negative correlation (r: −0.43, P ≤ 0.05) between phage abundance and the alpha diversity (Chao1) index of the bacterial community, in addition to a negative correlation (r: −0.36) with bacterial community activity. This might indicate that virulent phages hijacked and killed host cells during proliferation, thereby reducing the activity of the bacterial hosts. This further suggested that the synergistic changes between the phage and bacterial communities were not caused by the response of the temperate phages to the dynamics of hosts, as they benefit from the high growth rate of the host while limiting their lytic activity ( 37 , 39 ). This result might inspire us to develop a method to use phage to in situ regulate the microbial community structure of PHA-MMCs to improve their PHA synthesis efficiency. The efficiency of PHA synthesis by PHA-MMCs is generally lower than that by pure bacterial culture, partly because there are members in the microbial community that do not synthesize PHA, resulting in substrate waste ( 40 ). The selection pressure applied by the current enrichment strategy could not eliminate these non-PHA producers. If we could isolate and culture phages that can specifically lyse these non-PHA producers and add these phages into PHA-MMCs to specifically eliminate non-PHA producers, it is possible to obtain PHA-MMCs with higher PHA synthesis efficiency. Phage-host interaction dynamics To specifically elucidate the interactions between phages and hosts, the putative phage-host linkages and the antiviral defense systems of hosts were screened. During the interaction between phages and bacteria, bacteria use the CRISPR-Cas system to add spacers to their genome to resist the next infection ( 41 ). This allows us to search for potential host-phage relationships by comparing spacer sequences in bacteria with pOTU sequences. Overall, a total of 16,725 spacers were recovered from all 30 metagenomes. All five reactors had a positive relationship between the number of spacers recovered and time ( Fig. S8A ). In addition, it was observed that the number of spacers also had a significant and strong positive relationship with the total number of pOTUs across all samples ( Fig. S8B ). These results suggested that the CRISPR-Cas system played an important role in the ongoing interaction between bacteria and phages and integrated matching spacers into CRISPR arrays through time. Furthermore, the hosts of 200 high-quality pOTUs were searched using CRISPR-match and genomic homology matching. A total of 1,421 linkages were detected between 129 pOTUs (including 15 genera) and 409 hosts (including 73 genera). The linkages between phages and bacterial hosts were constructed as interaction networks at the genus level ( Fig. 4A ). This interaction network had 88 nodes and 198 links. The statistical characteristics of each node in the interaction network are found in Table S6 . Among these nodes, 61 nodes had a degree greater than 1. This result might indicate that the phage-host linkage was not unique, but rather that a single phage had the potential to infect multiple hosts, or that a single host was infested by multiple phages, which was consistent with previous studies in oil wells ( 42 ), earthworm intestines ( 30 ), and acid mines ( 43 ). For example, the hosts of the phage genus Casadabanvirus were distributed among 47 bacterial genera, including PHA-synthesizing bacteria such as Azoarcus, Hydrogenophaga, and Paracoccus. Second, there tended to be a significant positive correlation between the abundance (of both phage and host) and the number of phage-host linkages at the genus level ( Fig. S9 ). One reason for this might be that a high abundance of hosts that adapted to selective pressures (e.g., PHA producers) provided high encounter ratios for potential phages, and sufficient hosts also made these phages much more abundant than others ( 37 ). Another possible reason was that linkages between high-abundance phages and the host were more easily detected, as certain rare phages might not even be recovered and assembled with high quality. These dynamic linkages between phages and bacteria might have a potential role in maintaining community stability. These phages might selectively infect and lyse community members that were overabundant in the community, such as Azoarcus and Paracoccus, providing niches for other community members and preventing a single member from dominating the microbial community ( 37 ). This emergent state in which community members took turns to assume the leading position in the community had higher biodiversity and community resilience, leading to better community stability ( 44 ). Fig 4 The interaction between phages and hosts. (A) The linkages network of phages and hosts (all interactions between phages and hosts). The red nodes and green nodes represent the hosts and phages. The size of nodes represents the abundance of the genus. The size of the edges represents the number of linkages between phages and hosts. The “unclassified_f_Casjensviridae” represents the unclassified genus in the family Casjensviridae. The “Unclassified_sf_Sepvirinae” represents the unclassified genus in the subfamily “Sepvirinae.” (B) The histogram of the number of antiviral systems in each host. (C) The proportion of the top 20 antiviral systems in each host phylum. Network analysis of microbial and viral interactions, distribution of antiviral systems in MAGs, and heatmap of antiviral system prevalence across phyla. Major viral-host associations are highlighted, with Casadabanvirus depicting strong connections. In the co-evolution of phage and host, the hosts are also able to adapt different antiviral systems to resist phage infection ( 45 ). DefenseFinder was used to discover the antiviral systems encoded in the bacterial MAGs and found that the antiviral arsenal of the prokaryotes was highly variable ( Fig. 4B ), which was consistent with Tesson’s study ( 45 ). Overall, 86% of the MAGs encoded two or more types of antiviral weapons ( Fig. 4B ). However, as the number of encoded antiviral systems increased, the number of corresponding MAGs decreased rapidly, suggesting that encoding more antiviral systems was not a perfect survival strategy. Of the 109 antiviral systems detected, restriction-modification (RM) and CRISPR-Cas were dominant, accounting for 36.5% and 14.6% of the total, respectively ( Fig. 4C ). The RM and CRISPR-Cas provide defense through the degradation of viral nucleic acids, which appear to be the most widespread antiviral systems used by prokaryotes in a variety of habitats ( 30 , 45 , 46 ). The RM and CRISPR-Cas systems were the predominant antiviral systems in 10 of the 12 bacterial phyla, while Wadjet and SoFIC were the predominant antiviral systems in Actinobacteriota and Planctomycetota, respectively. In addition, hosts defended themselves against phages through various abortive infection systems, which were “altruistic” cell death systems that are activated by phage infection and limited viral replication ( 46 ). For example, some members of Cyanobacteria, Myxococcota, and Hydrogenedentota had the AbiE antiviral system which is encoded by bicistronic operons and functioned via a non-interacting (Type IV) bacteriostatic TA mechanism ( 47 ). Some members of Firmicutes had the Thoeris antiviral system. When triggered by phage infection, the ThsB sensor of the Thoeris defense systems produces signaling molecules, which activate the NAD+ degrading activity of ThsA, leading to the depletion of the host NAD+ pool and abortive infection ( 48 ). These results showed a fierce arms race between phages and bacteria. During this co-evolution process, bacteria can evolve a variety of antiviral defense systems. Diverse defense systems may help bacteria overcome or escape phages ( 49 ). In fact, the combined action of RM and CRISPR-Cas systems does enhance bacterial resistance to phages ( 50 ). This inspires us that if we could isolate phages infecting PHA producers and then strengthen their interaction with PHA producers, we may be able to cultivate PHA producers with stronger phage resistance. Adding these enhanced PHA producers into PHA-MMCs may enhance or stabilize the dominant position of PHA producers, thereby improving the overall PHA synthesis stability of the community. To specifically characterize the temporal dynamics of the phage-host linkages in each reactor, we used network diagrams to show the phages associated with the host at different time periods ( Fig. S10 to S14 ). We calculated the sequence similarity among the corresponding phages of each host using VIRIDIC ( 51 ). The results showed that most of the phages had very low sequence similarity to each other’s nucleotide sequence, suggesting that the bacterial members of PHA-MMCs could be infected by diverse phages ( Table S7 ). The linkages of the host and phages changed dynamically at different time points. For example, in Reactor D ( Fig. S13 ), the linkages between Paracoccus and phage 0111B24 were detected on days 52 and 145, but not on day 68. The loss of linkages or the appearance of new linkages also happened on the Paracoccus in Reactor E ( Fig. S14 ) and the Thauera in Reactor A ( Fig. S10 ). However, many “strong phages” that formed tight linkages with the host were detected at all times, such as the phage 1010E_19 with Brevundimonas in Reactor A ( Fig. S10 ). Among these hosts, Azomonas (in Reactors B, C, and E) and Brevundimonas (in Reactors A and D) had a more solid linkage with the phage, even though they were in different reactors. While the phages infecting Paracoccus (in Reactors C, D, and E) and Thaurea (in Reactor A) were more variable at different time points. Furthermore, phage characteristics (e.g., lifestyle) were not significantly related to the diversity of these linkages. This indicated that the stability of host-phage linkages was more dependent on host characteristics. Potential impacts of AMGs on the metabolisms and the PHA synthesis of host Phages can influence biogeochemical processes in the ocean ( 8 ), municipal wastewater treatment plants ( 10 ), and gut ( 30 ) by delivering AMGs while infecting hosts. In a recent study, Yuan et al. analyzed the phages in the sludge samples from 23 sewage treatment plants and found that these phages carried a large number of AMGs involved in carbon (acpP and prsA), nitrogen (amoC), sulfur (cysH), and phosphorus (phoH) metabolism, and these AMGs were active at the transcriptional level ( 10 ). In addition, researchers found that phages in paddy soil carried a large number of AMGs related to carbon fixation. In situ isotopic labeling experiments revealed that 13CO2 emissions from the treatment with added lysogenic phage decreased by approximately 17.9% ( 52 ). To investigate the effect of phages on the PHA anabolism of PHA-MMCs, AMGs encoded in pOTUs were predicted using DRAMv pipelines and functionally annotated by the KEGG database. These AMGs were generally involved in four types of activities, namely metabolism, environmental information processing, genetic informational processing, and cellular processes ( Fig. S15 ). The high proportion of AMGs related to purine metabolism, pyrimidine metabolism, amino acid biosynthesis, mismatch repair, homologous recombination, and DNA replication might be due to their favorability for phage replication in the host, which was consistent with other studies ( 8 , 10 ). It was worth noting that some AMGs in fatty acid metabolism may be involved in the PHA biosynthetic pathway, converting SCCAs (acetate, propionate, butyrate, valerate, and lactate) into PHA, which needs further identification. Overall, SCCAs are converted into (R)-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA and (R)-3-hydroxyvaleryl-CoA through a series of biochemical reactions, and then polymerized into poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) and poly(3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHV) by PHA synthase. After the conversion of acetate and lactate to acetyl-CoA, two molecules of acetyl-CoA are condensed to acetoacetyl-CoA by beta-ketothiolase. The acetoacetyl-CoA is reduced to (R)-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA by acetoacetyl-CoA reductase. Butyrate and valerate are converted to (R)-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA and (R)-3-hydroxyvaleryl-CoA by the beta-oxidation pathway, respectively. As for propionate, it is first converted to propionyl-CoA. Together with acetyl-CoA, they serve as substrates for beta-ketothiolase, followed by the reduction of 3-ketovaleryl-CoA to (R)-3-hydroxyvaleryl-CoA. Seven key AMGs involved in PHA synthesis were further screened and identified from the functionally annotated AMGs using the NCBI CD-search tool. These AMGs were distributed among 10 phages and 24 hosts ( Fig. 5A ). The phaC was the most important AMG, as it encodes a PHA polymerase that polymerizes the precursors (R)-3-hydroxybutanoyl-CoA and (R)-3-hydroxyvaleryl-CoA into poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) and poly(3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHV) ( 53 ). The genes fadJ (3-hydroxybutanoyl-CoA epimerase) ( 54 ) and phbB (acetoacetyl-CoA reductase) ( 55 ) catalyze the isomerization of (S)-3-hydroxybutanoyl-CoA and the reduction of acetoacetyl-CoA, respectively, to produce (R)-3-hydroxybutanoyl-CoA, providing precursors for PHA synthesis. In addition, acs (acetyl-CoA synthetase)/ackA (acetate kinase) ( 56 , 57 ), acdAB (acetyl-CoA synthetase) ( 58 ), and fadD (long-chain fatty acid-CoA ligase) ( 59 ) catalyze the conversion of acetate, propionate, and valerate to acetyl-CoA, propionyl-CoA, and valeryl-CoA, respectively, facilitating the entry of organic acids into the PHA synthesis pathway ( Fig. 5B ). Fig 5 The AMGs involved in PHA anabolism. (A) The distribution of AMGs in phages and hosts. The dotted line indicates the linkages between hosts and phages. The "*" indicates a high similarity (≥80%) between the host and phage AMGs. “Unclassified_f_X” represents the unclassified genus in family X. “Unclassified_o_X” represents the unclassified genus in order X. (B) Metabolic function of AMGs in PHA synthesis. The dotted lines represent the multi-metabolic pathways. Host-phage interaction heatmap, phage-encoded metabolic genes, and biochemical pathway of polyhydroxyalkanoate synthesis. Phages encode key genes (acs, ackA, phaC, phbB, fadD, acdAB) linked to host metabolism, influencing carbon utilization and storage. Furthermore, the AMGs in phage and host were found to be diverse in sequence by phylogenetic analysis and sequence similarity calculation ( Fig. S16 to S22 ). For example, the gene phaC encoding PHA synthase in hosts of a phage was not the same as AMG in this phage ( Fig. S16 ). The phaC of phage 0905D3 was very similar to the nucleotide sequence in host YJ0111E.5, but significantly different from that in another host YJ0905C.24. In addition, phaC of 0905D3 had transcriptional activity in sample 0905C ( Table S8 ). These phenomena were also present for the genes of fadD, acdAB, acs, and ackA ( Fig. S17, S19, S21 and S22 ). Unexpectedly, in the case of both phbB and fadJ, the sequence similarity between the AMGs in the phage and host was less than 75% ( Fig. S18 and S20 ). However, these AMGs carried by phages were transcriptionally active in different samples ( Table S8 ). These findings suggest that AMGs associated with PHA synthesis may hitchhike during phage-host infection cycles, enabling their dissemination across bacterial communities. Furthermore, phages may act as a critical genetic reservoir for bacterial members, facilitating access to PHA synthesis-related functional traits. Limitations and expectations of this study In this study, we investigated the phage communities within PHA-MMCs and their potential impacts on bacterial community structure and function, though several methodological limitations remain, which we aim to address in future research. First, while cross-system comparisons among five PHA-MMCs enriched with distinct carbon sources were intended to identify generalized patterns of phage-mediated bacterial community dynamics, setting parallel reactor systems would further prove these findings. Subsequent studies should consider reactor replication and systematic validation across different systems to rigorously elucidate the role of phages in shaping bacterial communities. The second limitation pertains to the prolonged intervals between sampling points, which compromised the ability to resolve more nuanced synchronous dynamics between phage and host abundance. Approximately half of the phages detected in this study exhibited multiple potential hosts, raising the question of whether such host generality may contribute to phage abundance and thereby obscure the coherence of phage and bacterial community structural shifts. Future studies should implement high-frequency sampling protocols within each of the PHA-MMC systems to rigorously track temporal fluctuations in phage and host abundance and concurrent community structural adaptations. The third limitation concerns the need for further investigation into the influence of phage-encoded AMGs on bacterial community-mediated PHA synthesis. The finding that some phages within PHA-MMCs harbored transcriptionally active AMGs suggests that these phages may provide a critical genetic reservoir for bacterial members. However, the potential contribution of phage-carried AMGs on the PHA synthesis capacity of bacterial communities requires controlled experimental validation. Furthermore, whether lytic and lysogenic phages carrying AMGs exert equivalent impacts on the PHA synthesis efficiency of bacterial communities remains unresolved. Notably, excessive suppression of hosts by lytic phages could negate any potential enhancement of overall PHA yield. In subsequent studies, more rigorous controlled trials need to be conducted. It is needed to isolate lytic and lysogenic phages harboring AMGs, scale up their cultivation, supply them to PHA-MMCs, and systematically monitor changes in the PHA synthesis efficiency of bacterial communities. Conclusions In this study, the dynamic interaction between phages and bacterial members in PHA-MMCs was investigated. In PHA-MMCs, phages could infect and lyse dominant species to vacate ecological niches for other species, resulting in a community succession state in which dominant species alternated. These results provide a potential explanation for the emergence of community members in open artificial microbial systems. In addition, while infecting different hosts, phages might express AMGs related to PHA synthesis to enhance the PHA synthesis capacity of community members. Of course, these interactions between bacteria and phages drawn from meta-omics analysis need to be further verified through rigorous validation experiments in the future. In subsequent studies, the in situ regulation of phages on PHA-MMCs can be considered to enhance its effectiveness in practical engineering applications. First, “phage therapy” could be used to add relevant phages to eliminate members that do not have the ability to synthesize PHA in PHA-MMCs, which would enhance the utilization efficiency of carbon sources. Second, the co-evolution of phages and PHA-synthesizing bacteria could be used to obtain strains with stronger antiviral capabilities. Third, phages carrying AMGs related to PHA synthesis could be applied to enhance the PHA synthesis capacity of community members. MATERIALS AND METHODS PHA-MMCs enrichment Five sequencing batch reactors (SBR), each with a working volume of 2 L, were used for the cultivation of PHA-MMCs. Activated sludge from a municipal wastewater treatment plant (Chengdu, China) was used as the inoculum source. Activated sludge was collected from the aerobic stage of the Anaerobic-Anoxic-Oxic process and filtered to remove solid impurities (screen size of 0.25 mm). Reactors A, B, C, D, and E were fed with synthetic wastewater containing acetate, propionate, butyrate, valerate, and lactate as the sole carbon source, respectively ( Fig. 1A ). The content of inorganic components and trace elements in synthetic wastewater is described in Supplemental information S1 . Five SBRs were operated according to the ADF selection strategy, with a cycle length of 12 h, consisting of feeding (10 min), aeration (650 min), settling (50 min), and discharge (10 min). All reactors were operated at 26°C. More detailed information can be found in Supplemental information S1 and Fig. S23 . The maximum PHA accumulation content (wt%) of PHA-MMCs at different times was evaluated by fed-batch PHA accumulation assays. The dissolved oxygen (DO) concentration was maintained at above 4 mg/L by aeration. The DO meter (WTW, Germany) was used to detect the DO concentration. The 200 mL enriched sludge from each reactor was transferred to a new 400 mL reaction vessel, and then 200 mL of fresh substrate was added. Air was supplied to the reactor through an aeration pump. After aeration for 1 hour, aeration was stopped. After standing for 15 minutes, 200 mL of supernatant was removed. Subsequently, 200 mL of fresh substrate was added for the second batch of fermentation. The above operation was repeated for another three times. After the fifth fermentation, 10 mL of fermentation liquid was taken and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min to collect the biomass. The biomass was pre-treated and the PHA content of biomass was determined using GC-MS. The detailed determination method was described in Supplemental information S2 . Sample collection, DNA/RNA extraction, and sequencing During the 145 days of the SBR operation, 10 time points were selected for biological sampling ( Fig. 1B ). By analyzing the abundance of dominant species in different reactors, we found that the dominant species in each reactor were in a state of constant fluctuation. To allow the meta-omics data to cover most of the dominant species in each reactor, we selected samples at different time points according to the species abundance curve ( Fig. S24 ). The fermentation broth was collected in sterile DNase- and RNase-free centrifuge tubes and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C. The biomass was collected and stored in liquid nitrogen. Total DNA and RNA were extracted via the cetyl-trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) method ( 60 ). DNA and RNA sequencing was performed on Illumina NovaSeq (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) at Majorbio Bio-Pharm Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The size of each metagenomic and metatranscriptomic raw sequence data was more than 15 GB and 9 GB, respectively. Sequence data associated have been deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive database ( PRJNA1121485 ; the accession numbers can be found in Table S9 ). Details of library construction and sequencing are described in Supplemental information S3 . The Trimmomatic v0.36 ( 61 ) was used to process raw DNA and RNA sequencing data to get clean raw data (ILLUMINACLIP: adapters/TruSeq3-PE.fa:2:30:10; LEADING:3; TRAILING:3; SLIDINGWINDOW:6:30; MINLEN:100). Bacterial MAGs assembly and bioinformatics analyses The clean DNA reads from 30 metagenomes were spliced into contigs by SPAdes v.3.5.0 ( 62 ). The bacterial MAGs were assembled from contigs by MetaWRAP v.1.2.1 ( 63 ). MAGs with completeness ≥70% and contamination ≤10% were selected for subsequent analysis. The taxonomy of MAGs was classified by GTDB-Tk version 2.1.1 based on the Genome Taxonomy Database ( 64 ). The metagenomic and metatranscriptomic reads were mapped to MAGs by BBMap (v35.85; http://sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap/ ). The abundance and activity of MAGs were calculated as reads per kilobase transcript per million reads (RPKM). 
 A b u n d a n c e   o r   a c t i v i t y   o f   M A G = r e a d s ( M A G ) s i z e ( M A G ) 1 , 000 r e a d s ( a l l   M A G s ) 100 , 000 
 In the equation, the “reads (MAG)” is the number of reads of metagenomic (or metatranscriptomic) raw data mapped to each MAG. The “reads (all MAGs)” is the sum of reads of all MAGs. The “size (MAG)” is the number of base pairs of each MAG. To compare differences in microbial communities at different enrichment times, all MAGs from the same reactor were clustered using dRep v.2.6.2 (-pa 0.9, -sa 0.99) ( 20 ). The abundance and activity values of clustered MAGs at different time points were summarized as abundance or activity ( Tables S1 to S5 ) for subsequent statistical analysis. The CRISPR spacers were searched from MAG scaffolds by the CRISPR recognition tool (CRT, v2.1) ( 65 ). The antiphage systems of MAGs were detected by DefenseFinder v.1.2.2 ( 45 ). APC identification and bioinformatics analyses The APCs were identified comprehensively from metagenomic contigs by VirSorter2 v.2.1.0 ( 28 ) and VirFinder v1.1 ( 29 ). A contig (length ≥5 kb) that met one of the following three conditions was selected as an APC: (i) VirSorter v2.1 score ≥0.9; (ii) VirFinder v1.1 score ≥0.9 along with P < 0.05; and (iii) both VirSorter2 score ≥0.5 and VirFinder ≥ 0.7, P < 0.05. CD-HIT v.4.7 was used to cluster the APCs to obtain pOTUs with parameter -c at 0.95 and -aS at 0.8. The abundance of pOTUs was calculated as reads per kilobase transcript per million reads (RPKM) by BBMap (v35.85; http://sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap/ ). 
 A b u n d a n c e   o f   p O T U = r e a d s ( p O T U ) s i z e ( p O T U ) 1 , 000 r e a d s ( a l l   p O T U s ) 100 , 000 
 In the equation, the “reads (pOTU)” is the number of reads of metagenomic raw data mapped to each pOTU. The “reads (all pOTUs)” is the sum of reads of all pOTUs. The “size(pOTU)” is the number of base pairs of each pOTU. The abundance of pOTUs in five SBRs is described in Tables S1 to S5 . The CheckV v.1.0.3 ( 31 ) was used to assess the quality of pOTUs, and those with completeness ≥90% and contamination ≤60% were used for the subsequent analysis. The taxonomy of pOTUs was classified by PhaGCN2 v.2.0 ( 34 ). The lifestyle of pOTUs was predicted by the PhaTYP ( 33 ) function in PhaBOX ( 66 ). The AMGs of pOTUs were identified and annotated by the DRAM-V v.1.5.0 ( 67 ) pipeline as follows: The VirSorter2 v.2.1.0 ( 28 ) (--prep-for-dramv) was run on pOTU sequences, and then the AMGs were predicted from the resulting sequences by DRAM-V v.1.5.0 ( 67 ). The putative AMGs were further confirmed using the NCBI CD-search tool ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi ) with a threshold value of e-value <10−5. The prediction of phage-host linkages was performed on two different in silico strategies: (i) CRISPR-spacer match. The CRISPR spacers of MAGs were queried for exact matches to pOTUs sequences by BLASTn v.2.9.0 ( 68 ). Only the matches (identity ≥ 97%, coverage ≥ 90%, mismatch ≤ 1) were regarded as highly confident phage-host linkages. (ii) The sequence homology between MAGs and pOTUs. The sequences of pOTUs were compared with MAGs by BLASTn v.2.9.0 ( 68 ). The matches with identity ≥70%, bit score ≥50, alignment length ≥2,500, and e-value ≤0.001 were regarded as highly confident phage-host linkages. Based on these potential phage-host linkages, the genus-level phage-host network was constructed and visualized by Gephi (0.10.1). Statistical analysis and visualization The α diversity indexes and principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) of phage and microbial community were calculated in R v.4.3.2 with package “phyloseq” ( 69 ). Based on the abundance table of community members, the R package “vegan” was used to calculate the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity between bacterial and phage communities at adjacent time points to characterize the degree of change in community member structure ( 42 ). The Spearman correlation coefficient and P-value between the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity of bacterial and phage communities were provided by the function cor.test() in R v.4.3.2. The MRS ( 36 ) was used to quantitatively characterize this dynamic change of phage and bacterial communities. MRS is a temporal analog of species rank-abundance distributions and indicates the degree of species reordering between two time points. M R S =   ∑ i = 1 N ( | R i , t + 1 − R i , t | ) / N , where N is the number of species in common in both time points, t is the time point, and Ri,t is the relative rank of species i at time t. To further analyze the impact of phage communities on bacterial communities, SEM was constructed with phage community characteristics (α diversity, abundance, and activity) as predictor variables and bacterial cominmunity characteristics (α diversity, abundance, and activity) as response variables. The composition is represented by the PC1 from the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity-based principal coordinate analyses. The α diversity is represented by the Chao1 index. The phage abundance is the sum of the abundance value of each phage in the sample based on the metagenomic data. The bacterial activity is the sum of the activity value of each bacterial MAG in the sample based on the metatranscriptomic data. The SEM analysis was performed in R v.4.3.2 with the package “piecewiseSEM” v.2.3.0 ( https://jslefche.github.io/piecewiseSEM/ ). The network diagram was visualized by Gephi v.0.10. The heatmap, phylogenetic tree, and gene cluster map were visualized by chiplot ( https://www.chiplot.online/ ). Supplementary Material Reviewer comments ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was funded by the China Petroleum and Chemical Corporation (No. 421063-10). Y.-Q.T. and J.Y. conceived the project and designed the experiments. J.Y. did the experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. Y.-Q.T. supervised the project and revised the manuscript. Y.Z., Y.C., M.G., and Z.-Y.X. contributed to the methodology. X.H., M.W., and Q.Z. contributed to sample collection and nucleic acid extraction. DATA AVAILABILITY Sequence data associated have been deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive database ( PRJNA1121485 ). ETHICS APPROVAL No animals or humans were involved in this study. SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL The following material is available online at https://doi.org/10.1128/msystems.00200-25 . 10.1128/msystems.00200-25.SuF1 Supplemental material msystems.00200-25-s0001.pdf Supplemental figures and information. 10.1128/msystems.00200-25.SuF2 Table S1 msystems.00200-25-s0002.xlsx The abundance (activity) of MAGs and the abundance of pOTUs in Reactor A. 10.1128/msystems.00200-25.SuF3 Table S2 msystems.00200-25-s0003.xlsx The abundance (activity) of MAGs and the abundance of pOTUs in Reactor B. 10.1128/msystems.00200-25.SuF4 Table S3 msystems.00200-25-s0004.xlsx The abundance (activity) of MAGs and the abundance of pOTUs in Reactor C. 10.1128/msystems.00200-25.SuF5 Table S4 msystems.00200-25-s0005.xlsx The abundance (activity) of MAGs and the abundance of pOTUs in Reactor D. 10.1128/msystems.00200-25.SuF6 Table S5 msystems.00200-25-s0006.xlsx The abundance (activity) of MAGs and the abundance of pOTUs in Reactor E. 10.1128/msystems.00200-25.SuF7 Table S6 msystems.00200-25-s0007.xlsx The statistical characteristics of the interaction network. 10.1128/msystems.00200-25.SuF8 Table S7 msystems.00200-25-s0008.xlsx The sequence similarity among phages of each host. 10.1128/msystems.00200-25.SuF9 Table S8 msystems.00200-25-s0009.xlsx The activity of AMGs in MAGs and pOTUs. 10.1128/msystems.00200-25.SuF10 Table S9 and S10 msystems.00200-25-s0010.xlsx Accession numbers of sequence data and sequences of AMGs. 10.1128/msystems.00200-25.SuF11 OPEN PEER REVIEW reviewer-comments.pdf An accounting of the reviewer comments and feedback. ASM does not own the copyrights to Supplemental Material that may be linked to, or accessed through, an article. The authors have granted ASM a non-exclusive, world-wide license to publish the Supplemental Material files. Please contact the corresponding author directly for reuse. REFERENCES 1 
 Wang 
 YC , Lv 
 YH , Yang 
 WX , Wang 
 C . 2024 . Revisiting the linkage between engineered ecosystem function and the microbial community: a review from ecological perspectives . Crit Rev Environ Sci Technol 
 54 : 1569 – 1591 . doi: 10.1080/10643389.2024.2334666 2 
 Wu 
 M , Liu 
 X , Xiong 
 H , Tu 
 W , Gong 
 X , Yu 
 P , Zou 
 Y , Wang 
 H . 2021 . Polyhydroxyalkanoate production from food waste coupled with aerobic nitrate reduction . ACS Sustainable Chem Eng 
 9 : 15461 – 15468 . doi: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.1c04726 3 
 Choi 
 SY , Cho 
 IJ , Lee 
 Y , Kim 
 YJ , Kim 
 KJ , Lee 
 SY . 2020 . Microbial polyhydroxyalkanoates and nonnatural polyesters . Adv Mater Weinheim 
 32 : e1907138 . doi: 10.1002/adma.201907138 32249983 4 
 Rodriguez-Perez 
 S , Serrano 
 A , Pantión 
 AA , Alonso-Fariñas 
 B . 2018 . Challenges of scaling-up PHA production from waste streams. a review . J Environ Manage 
 205 : 215 – 230 . doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.09.083 28987985 
 5 
 Dionisi 
 D , Majone 
 M , Papa 
 V , Beccari 
 M . 2004 . Biodegradable polymers from organic acids by using activated sludge enriched by aerobic periodic feeding . Biotechnol Bioeng 
 85 : 569 – 579 . doi: 10.1002/bit.10910 14966798 
 6 
 Serafim 
 LS , Lemos 
 PC , Albuquerque 
 MGE , Reis 
 MAM . 2008 . Strategies for PHA production by mixed cultures and renewable waste materials . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 
 81 : 615 – 628 . doi: 10.1007/s00253-008-1757-y 19002455 
 7 
 Huang 
 L , Chen 
 Z , Wen 
 Q , Zhao 
 L , Lee 
 DJ , Yang 
 L , Wang 
 Y . 2018 . Insights into feast-famine polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA)-producer selection: microbial community succession, relationships with system function and underlying driving forces . Water Res 
 131 : 167 – 176 . doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2017.12.033 29281810 
 8 
 Yu 
 M , Zhang 
 M , Zeng 
 R , Cheng 
 R , Zhang 
 R , Hou 
 Y , Kuang 
 F , Feng 
 X , Dong 
 X , Li 
 Y , Shao 
 Z , Jin 
 M . 2024 . Diversity and potential host-interactions of viruses inhabiting deep-sea seamount sediments . Nat Commun 
 15 : 3228 . doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-47600-1 38622147 
 PMC11018836 9 
 Xu 
 Q , Zhang 
 H , Vandenkoornhuyse 
 P , Guo 
 S , Kuzyakov 
 Y , Shen 
 Q , Ling 
 N . 2024 . Carbon starvation raises capacities in bacterial antibiotic resistance and viral auxiliary carbon metabolism in soils . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 121 : e2318160121 . doi: 10.1073/pnas.2318160121 38598339 
 PMC11032446 10 
 Yuan 
 L , Ju 
 F . 2023 . Potential Auxiliary metabolic capabilities and activities reveal biochemical impacts of viruses in municipal wastewater treatment plants . Environ Sci Technol 
 57 : 5485 – 5498 . doi: 10.1021/acs.est.2c07800 36947091 
 11 
 Zhang 
 J , Tang 
 A , Jin 
 T , Sun 
 D , Guo 
 F , Lei 
 H , Lin 
 L , Shu 
 W , Yu 
 P , Li 
 X , Li 
 B . 2024 . A panoramic view of the virosphere in three wastewater treatment plants by integrating viral‐like particle‐concentrated and traditional non‐concentrated metagenomic approaches . iMeta 
 3 : e188 . doi: 10.1002/imt2.188 38898980 
 PMC11183165 12 
 Hegarty 
 B . 2025 . Making waves: Intelligent phage cocktail design, a pathway to precise microbial control in water systems . Water Res 
 268 : 122594 . doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2024.122594 39405620 
 13 
 Tamaki 
 H , Zhang 
 R , Angly 
 FE , Nakamura 
 S , Hong 
 P-Y , Yasunaga 
 T , Kamagata 
 Y , Liu 
 W-T . 2012 . Metagenomic analysis of DNA viruses in a wastewater treatment plant in tropical climate . Environ Microbiol 
 14 : 441 – 452 . doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02630.x 22040222 
 14 
 Chen 
 Y , Wang 
 Y , Paez-Espino 
 D , Polz 
 MF , Zhang 
 T . 2021 . Prokaryotic viruses impact functional microorganisms in nutrient removal and carbon cycle in wastewater treatment plants . Nat Commun 
 12 : 5398 . doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-25678-1 34518545 
 PMC8438041 15 
 Sieradzki 
 ET , Ignacio-Espinoza 
 JC , Needham 
 DM , Fichot 
 EB , Fuhrman 
 JA . 2019 . Dynamic marine viral infections and major contribution to photosynthetic processes shown by spatiotemporal picoplankton metatranscriptomes . Nat Commun 
 10 : 1169 . doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-09106-z 30862830 
 PMC6414667 16 
 Thompson 
 LR , Zeng 
 Q , Kelly 
 L , Huang 
 KH , Singer 
 AU , Stubbe 
 J , Chisholm 
 SW . 2011 . Phage auxiliary metabolic genes and the redirection of cyanobacterial host carbon metabolism . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 108 : E757 – 64 . doi: 10.1073/pnas.1102164108 21844365 
 PMC3182688 17 
 Gazitúa 
 MC , Vik 
 DR , Roux 
 S , Gregory 
 AC , Bolduc 
 B , Widner 
 B , Mulholland 
 MR , Hallam 
 SJ , Ulloa 
 O , Sullivan 
 MB . 2021 . Potential virus-mediated nitrogen cycling in oxygen-depleted oceanic waters . ISME J 
 15 : 981 – 998 . doi: 10.1038/s41396-020-00825-6 33199808 
 PMC8115048 18 
 Anantharaman 
 K , Duhaime 
 MB , Breier 
 JA , Wendt 
 KA , Toner 
 BM , Dick 
 GJ . 2014 . Sulfur oxidation genes in diverse deep-sea viruses . Science 
 344 : 757 – 760 . doi: 10.1126/science.1252229 24789974 
 19 
 Wang 
 X , Carvalho 
 G , Reis 
 MAM , Oehmen 
 A . 2018 . Metabolic modeling of the substrate competition among multiple VFAs for PHA production by mixed microbial cultures . J Biotechnol 
 280 : 62 – 69 . doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2018.06.342 29932948 
 20 
 Olm 
 MR , Brown 
 CT , Brooks 
 B , Banfield 
 JF . 2017 . dRep: a tool for fast and accurate genomic comparisons that enables improved genome recovery from metagenomes through de-replication . ISME J 
 11 : 2864 – 2868 . doi: 10.1038/ismej.2017.126 28742071 
 PMC5702732 21 
 Wang 
 X , Oehmen 
 A , Carvalho 
 G , Reis 
 MAM . 2020 . Community profile governs substrate competition in polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA)-producing mixed cultures . N Biotechnol 
 58 : 32 – 37 . doi: 10.1016/j.nbt.2020.03.003 32497679 
 22 
 Simona 
 C , Laura 
 L , Francesco 
 V , Marianna 
 V , Cristina 
 MG , Barbara 
 T , Mauro 
 M , Simona 
 R . 2022 . Effect of the organic loading rate on the PHA-storing microbiome in sequencing batch reactors operated with uncoupled carbon and nitrogen feeding . Sci Total Environ 
 825 : 153995 . doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.153995 35192819 
 23 
 Jiang 
 Y , Marang 
 L , Tamis 
 J , van Loosdrecht 
 MCM , Dijkman 
 H , Kleerebezem 
 R . 2012 . Waste to resource: converting paper mill wastewater to bioplastic . Water Res 
 46 : 5517 – 5530 . doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2012.07.028 22921584 
 24 
 Marang 
 L , Jiang 
 Y , van Loosdrecht 
 MCM , Kleerebezem 
 R . 2013 . Butyrate as preferred substrate for polyhydroxybutyrate production . Bioresour Technol 
 142 : 232 – 239 . doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2013.05.031 23743427 
 25 
 Wang 
 X , Oehmen 
 A , Freitas 
 EB , Carvalho 
 G , Reis 
 MAM . 2017 . The link of feast-phase dissolved oxygen (DO) with substrate competition and microbial selection in PHA production . Water Res 
 112 : 269 – 278 . doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2017.01.064 28183066 
 26 
 Jin 
 M , Guo 
 X , Zhang 
 R , Qu 
 W , Gao 
 B , Zeng 
 R . 2019 . Diversities and potential biogeochemical impacts of mangrove soil viruses . Microbiome 
 7 : 58 . doi: 10.1186/s40168-019-0675-9 30975205 
 PMC6460857 27 
 Cheng 
 R , Li 
 X , Jiang 
 L , Gong 
 L , Geslin 
 C , Shao 
 Z . 2022 . Virus diversity and interactions with hosts in deep-sea hydrothermal vents . Microbiome 
 10 : 235 . doi: 10.1186/s40168-022-01441-6 36566239 
 PMC9789665 28 
 Guo 
 J , Bolduc 
 B , Zayed 
 AA , Varsani 
 A , Dominguez-Huerta 
 G , Delmont 
 TO , Pratama 
 AA , Gazitúa 
 MC , Vik 
 D , Sullivan 
 MB , Roux 
 S . 2021 . VirSorter2: a multi-classifier, expert-guided approach to detect diverse DNA and RNA viruses . Microbiome 
 9 : 37 . doi: 10.1186/s40168-020-00990-y 33522966 
 PMC7852108 29 
 Ren 
 J , Ahlgren 
 NA , Lu 
 YY , Fuhrman 
 JA , Sun 
 F . 2017 . VirFinder: a novel k-mer based tool for identifying viral sequences from assembled metagenomic data . Microbiome 
 5 : 69 . doi: 10.1186/s40168-017-0283-5 28683828 
 PMC5501583 30 
 Xia 
 R , Sun 
 M , Balcázar 
 JL , Yu 
 P , Hu 
 F , Alvarez 
 PJJ . 2023 . Benzo[a]pyrene stress impacts adaptive strategies and ecological functions of earthworm intestinal viromes . ISME J 
 17 : 1004 – 1014 . doi: 10.1038/s41396-023-01408-x 37069233 
 PMC10284932 31 
 Nayfach 
 S , Camargo 
 AP , Schulz 
 F , Eloe-Fadrosh 
 E , Roux 
 S , Kyrpides 
 NC . 2021 . CheckV assesses the quality and completeness of metagenome-assembled viral genomes . Nat Biotechnol 
 39 : 578 – 585 . doi: 10.1038/s41587-020-00774-7 33349699 
 PMC8116208 32 
 Glickman 
 C , Hendrix 
 J , Strong 
 M . 2021 . Simulation study and comparative evaluation of viral contiguous sequence identification tools . BMC Bioinformatics 
 22 : 329 . doi: 10.1186/s12859-021-04242-0 34130621 
 PMC8207588 33 
 Shang 
 J , Tang 
 X , Sun 
 Y . 2023 . PhaTYP: predicting the lifestyle for bacteriophages using BERT . Brief Bioinform 
 24 : bbac487 . doi: 10.1093/bib/bbac487 36659812 
 PMC9851330 34 
 Jiang 
 JZ , Yuan 
 WG , Shang 
 J , Shi 
 YH , Yang 
 LL , Liu 
 M , Zhu 
 P , Jin 
 T , Sun 
 Y , Yuan 
 LH . 2023 . Virus classification for viral genomic fragments using PhaGCN2 . Brief Bioinformatics 
 24 : bbac505 . doi: 10.1093/bib/bbac505 36464489 
 35 
 Li 
 Z , Pan 
 D , Wei 
 G , Pi 
 W , Zhang 
 C , Wang 
 J-H , Peng 
 Y , Zhang 
 L , Wang 
 Y , Hubert 
 CRJ , Dong 
 X . 2021 . Deep sea sediments associated with cold seeps are a subsurface reservoir of viral diversity . ISME J 
 15 : 2366 – 2378 . doi: 10.1038/s41396-021-00932-y 33649554 
 PMC8319345 36 
 Hallett 
 LM , Jones 
 SK , MacDonald 
 AAM , Jones 
 MB , Flynn 
 DFB , Ripplinger 
 J , Slaughter 
 P , Gries 
 C , Collins 
 SL , Poisot 
 T . 2016 . Codyn: an r package of community dynamics metrics . Methods Ecol Evol 
 7 : 1146 – 1151 . doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.12569 37 
 Castledine 
 M , Buckling 
 A . 2024 . Critically evaluating the relative importance of phage in shaping microbial community composition . Trends Microbiol 
 32 : 957 – 969 . doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2024.02.014 38604881 
 38 
 Winter 
 C , Bouvier 
 T , Weinbauer 
 MG , Thingstad 
 TF . 2010 . Trade-offs between competition and defense specialists among unicellular planktonic organisms: the “killing the winner” hypothesis revisited . Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 
 74 : 42 – 57 . doi: 10.1128/MMBR.00034-09 20197498 
 PMC2832346 39 
 Knowles 
 B , Silveira 
 CB , Bailey 
 BA , Barott 
 K , Cantu 
 VA , Cobián-Güemes 
 AG , Coutinho 
 FH , Dinsdale 
 EA , Felts 
 B , Furby 
 KA , et al. . 2016 . Lytic to temperate switching of viral communities . Nature 
 531 : 466 – 470 . doi: 10.1038/nature17193 26982729 
 40 
 Pei 
 R , Estévez-Alonso 
 Á , Ortiz-Seco 
 L , van Loosdrecht 
 MCM , Kleerebezem 
 R , Werker 
 A . 2022 . Exploring the limits of polyhydroxyalkanoate production by municipal activated sludge . Environ Sci Technol 
 56 : 11729 – 11738 . doi: 10.1021/acs.est.2c03043 35900322 
 PMC9387092 41 
 Meaden 
 S , Biswas 
 A , Arkhipova 
 K , Morales 
 SE , Dutilh 
 BE , Westra 
 ER , Fineran 
 PC . 2022 . High viral abundance and low diversity are associated with increased CRISPR-Cas prevalence across microbial ecosystems . Curr Biol 
 32 : 220 – 227 . doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.10.038 34758284 
 PMC8751634 42 
 Amundson 
 KK , Roux 
 S , Shelton 
 JL , Wilkins 
 MJ . 2023 . Long-term CRISPR locus dynamics and stable host-virus co-existence in subsurface fractured shales . Curr Biol 
 33 : 3125 – 3135 . doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2023.06.033 37402375 
 43 
 Gao 
 S , Paez-Espino 
 D , Li 
 J , Ai 
 H , Liang 
 J , Luo 
 Z , Zheng 
 J , Chen 
 H , Shu 
 W , Huang 
 L . 2022 . Patterns and ecological drivers of viral communities in acid mine drainage sediments across Southern China . Nat Commun 
 13 . doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30049-5 PMC9061769 35501347 44 
 Hu 
 J , Amor 
 DR , Barbier 
 M , Bunin 
 G , Gore 
 J . 2022 . Emergent phases of ecological diversity and dynamics mapped in microcosms . Science 
 378 : 85 – 89 . doi: 10.1126/science.abm7841 36201585 
 45 
 Tesson 
 F , Hervé 
 A , Mordret 
 E , Touchon 
 M , d’Humières 
 C , Cury 
 J , Bernheim 
 A . 2022 . Systematic and quantitative view of the antiviral arsenal of prokaryotes . Nat Commun 
 13 : 2561 . doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30269-9 35538097 
 PMC9090908 46 
 Georjon 
 H , Bernheim 
 A . 2023 . The highly diverse antiphage defence systems of bacteria . Nat Rev Microbiol 
 21 : 686 – 700 . doi: 10.1038/s41579-023-00934-x 37460672 
 47 
 Dy 
 RL , Przybilski 
 R , Semeijn 
 K , Salmond 
 GPC , Fineran 
 PC . 2014 . A widespread bacteriophage abortive infection system functions through A type IV toxin-antitoxin mechanism . Nucleic Acids Res 
 42 : 4590 – 4605 . doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1419 24465005 
 PMC3985639 48 
 Ofir 
 G , Herbst 
 E , Baroz 
 M , Cohen 
 D , Millman 
 A , Doron 
 S , Tal 
 N , Malheiro 
 DBA , Malitsky 
 S , Amitai 
 G , Sorek 
 R . 2021 . Antiviral activity of bacterial TIR domains via immune signalling molecules . Nature New Biol 
 600 : 116 – 120 . doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04098-7 34853457 49 
 Hampton 
 HG , Watson 
 BNJ , Fineran 
 PC . 2020 . The arms race between bacteria and their phage foes . Nature 
 577 : 327 – 336 . doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1894-8 31942051 
 50 
 Dupuis 
 M-È , Villion 
 M , Magadán 
 AH , Moineau 
 S . 2013 . CRISPR-Cas and restriction-modification systems are compatible and increase phage resistance . Nat Commun 
 4 : 2087 . doi: 10.1038/ncomms3087 23820428 
 51 
 Moraru 
 C , Varsani 
 A , Kropinski 
 AM . 2020 . VIRIDIC-a novel tool to calculate the intergenomic similarities of prokaryote-infecting viruses . Viruses 
 12 : 1268 . doi: 10.3390/v12111268 33172115 
 PMC7694805 52 
 Zhu 
 D , Liu 
 SY , Sun 
 MM , Yi 
 XY , Duan 
 GL , Ye 
 M , Gillings 
 MR , Zhu 
 YG . 2024 . Adaptive expression of phage auxiliary metabolic genes in paddy soils and their contribution toward global carbon sequestration . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 121 : e2419798121 . doi: 10.1073/pnas.2419798121 39602267 
 PMC11626168 53 
 Chek 
 MF , Hiroe 
 A , Hakoshima 
 T , Sudesh 
 K , Taguchi 
 S . 2019 . PHA synthase (PhaC): interpreting the functions of bioplastic-producing enzyme from a structural perspective . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 
 103 : 1131 – 1141 . doi: 10.1007/s00253-018-9538-8 30511262 
 54 
 Yamamoto 
 Y , Aiba 
 H , Baba 
 T , Hayashi 
 K , Inada 
 T , Isono 
 K , Itoh 
 T , Kimura 
 S , Kitagawa 
 M , Makino 
 K , Miki 
 T , Mitsuhashi 
 N , Mizobuchi 
 K , Mori 
 H , Nakade 
 S , Nakamura 
 Y , Nashimoto 
 H , Oshima 
 T , Oyama 
 S , Saito 
 N , Sampei 
 G , Satoh 
 Y , Sivasundaram 
 S , Tagami 
 H , Horiuchi 
 T . 1997 . Construction of a contiguous 874-kb sequence of the Escherichia coli -K12 genome corresponding to 50.0-68.8 min on the linkage map and analysis of its sequence features . DNA Res 
 4 : 91 – 113 . doi: 10.1093/dnares/4.2.91 9205837 
 55 
 Matsumoto 
 K , Tanaka 
 Y , Watanabe 
 T , Motohashi 
 R , Ikeda 
 K , Tobitani 
 K , Yao 
 M , Tanaka 
 I , Taguchi 
 S . 2013 . Directed evolution and structural analysis of NADPH-dependent acetoacetyl coenzyme A (Acetoacetyl-CoA) reductase from ralstonia eutropha reveals two mutations responsible for enhanced kinetics . Appl Environ Microbiol 
 79 : 6134 – 6139 . doi: 10.1128/AEM.01768-13 23913421 
 PMC3811355 56 
 Fujino 
 T , Kondo 
 J , Ishikawa 
 M , Morikawa 
 K , Yamamoto 
 TT . 2001 . Acetyl-CoA synthetase 2, a mitochondrial matrix enzyme involved in the oxidation of acetate . J Biol Chem 
 276 : 11420 – 11426 . doi: 10.1074/jbc.M008782200 11150295 
 57 
 Chittori 
 S , Savithri 
 HS , Murthy 
 MRN . 2011 . Preliminary X-ray crystallographic studies on acetate kinase (AckA) from Salmonella typhimurium in two crystal forms . Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun 
 67 : 1658 – 1661 . doi: 10.1107/S1744309111043740 PMC3232164 22139191 58 
 Musfeldt 
 M , Schönheit 
 P . 2002 . Novel type of ADP-forming acetyl coenzyme a synthetase in hyperthermophilic Archaea: heterologous expression and characterization of isoenzymes from the sulfate reducer Archaeoglobus fulgidus and the methanogen Methanococcus jannaschii . J Bacteriol 
 184 : 636 – 644 . doi: 10.1128/JB.184.3.636-644.2002 11790732 
 PMC139507 59 
 Black 
 PN , DiRusso 
 CC , Metzger 
 AK , Heimert 
 TL . 1992 . Cloning, sequencing, and expression of the fadD gene of Escherichia coli encoding acyl coenzyme a synthetase . J Biol Chem 
 267 : 25513 – 25520 . 1460045 
 60 
 Griffiths 
 RI , Whiteley 
 AS , O’Donnell 
 AG , Bailey 
 MJ . 2000 . Rapid method for coextraction of DNA and RNA from natural environments for analysis of ribosomal DNA- and rRNA-based microbial community composition . Appl Environ Microbiol 
 66 : 5488 – 5491 . doi: 10.1128/AEM.66.12.5488-5491.2000 11097934 
 PMC92488 61 
 Bolger 
 AM , Lohse 
 M , Usadel 
 B . 2014 . Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data . Bioinformatics 
 30 : 2114 – 2120 . doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170 24695404 
 PMC4103590 62 
 Bankevich 
 A , Nurk 
 S , Antipov 
 D , Gurevich 
 AA , Dvorkin 
 M , Kulikov 
 AS , Lesin 
 VM , Nikolenko 
 SI , Pham 
 S , Prjibelski 
 AD , Pyshkin 
 AV , Sirotkin 
 AV , Vyahhi 
 N , Tesler 
 G , Alekseyev 
 MA , Pevzner 
 PA . 2012 . SPAdes: a new genome assembly algorithm and its applications to single-cell sequencing . J Comput Biol 
 19 : 455 – 477 . doi: 10.1089/cmb.2012.0021 22506599 
 PMC3342519 63 
 Uritskiy 
 GV , DiRuggiero 
 J , Taylor 
 J . 2018 . MetaWRAP-a flexible pipeline for genome-resolved metagenomic data analysis . Microbiome 
 6 : 158 . doi: 10.1186/s40168-018-0541-1 30219103 
 PMC6138922 64 
 Chaumeil 
 P-A , Mussig 
 AJ , Hugenholtz 
 P , Parks 
 DH . 2022 . GTDB-Tk v2: memory friendly classification with the genome taxonomy database . Bioinformatics 
 38 : 5315 – 5316 . doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac672 36218463 
 PMC9710552 65 
 Bland 
 C , Ramsey 
 TL , Sabree 
 F , Lowe 
 M , Brown 
 K , Kyrpides 
 NC , Hugenholtz 
 P . 2007 . CRISPR recognition tool (CRT): a tool for automatic detection of clustered regularly interspaced palindromic repeats . BMC Bioinformatics 
 8 : 209 . doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-8-209 17577412 
 PMC1924867 66 
 Shang 
 J , Peng 
 C , Liao 
 H , Tang 
 X , Sun 
 Y . 2023 . PhaBOX: a web server for identifying and characterizing phage contigs in metagenomic data . Bioinform Adv 
 3 : vbad101 . doi: 10.1093/bioadv/vbad101 37641717 
 PMC10460485 67 
 Shaffer 
 M , Borton 
 MA , McGivern 
 BB , Zayed 
 AA , La Rosa 
 SL , Solden 
 LM , Liu 
 P , Narrowe 
 AB , Rodríguez-Ramos 
 J , Bolduc 
 B , Gazitúa 
 MC , Daly 
 RA , Smith 
 GJ , Vik 
 DR , Pope 
 PB , Sullivan 
 MB , Roux 
 S , Wrighton 
 KC . 2020 . DRAM for distilling microbial metabolism to automate the curation of microbiome function . Nucleic Acids Res 
 48 : 8883 – 8900 . doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa621 32766782 
 PMC7498326 68 
 Ye 
 J , McGinnis 
 S , Madden 
 TL . 2006 . BLAST: improvements for better sequence analysis . Nucleic Acids Res 
 34 : W6 – 9 . doi: 10.1093/nar/gkl164 16845079 
 PMC1538791 69 
 McMurdie 
 PJ , Holmes 
 S . 2013 . Phyloseq: an R package for reproducible interactive analysis and graphics of microbiome census data . PLoS One 
 8 : e61217 . doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061217 23630581 
 PMC3632530
