1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Feb;81(3):948-56. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02682-14. Epub
 2014 Nov 21.

Rapid redox signal transmission by "Cable Bacteria" beneath a photosynthetic 
biofilm.

Malkin SY(1), Meysman FJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Analytical, Environmental, and Geo-chemistry, Vrije 
Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, and Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea 
Research (NIOZ), Yerseke, The Netherlands smalkin@uga.edu.
(2)Department of Analytical, Environmental, and Geo-chemistry, Vrije 
Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, and Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea 
Research (NIOZ), Yerseke, The Netherlands.

Recently, long filamentous bacteria, belonging to the family Desulfobulbaceae, 
were shown to induce electrical currents over long distances in the surface 
layer of marine sediments. These "cable bacteria" are capable of harvesting 
electrons from free sulfide in deeper sediment horizons and transferring these 
electrons along their longitudinal axes to oxygen present near the 
sediment-water interface. In the present work, we investigated the relationship 
between cable bacteria and a photosynthetic algal biofilm. In a first 
experiment, we investigated sediment that hosted both cable bacteria and a 
photosynthetic biofilm and tested the effect of an imposed diel light-dark cycle 
by continuously monitoring sulfide at depth. Changes in photosynthesis at the 
sediment surface had an immediate and repeatable effect on sulfide 
concentrations at depth, indicating that cable bacteria can rapidly transmit a 
geochemical effect to centimeters of depth in response to changing conditions at 
the sediment surface. We also observed a secondary response of the free sulfide 
at depth manifest on the time scale of hours, suggesting that cable bacteria 
adjust to a moving oxygen front with a regulatory or a behavioral response, such 
as motility. Finally, we show that on the time scale of days, the presence of an 
oxygenic biofilm results in a deeper and more acidic suboxic zone, indicating 
that a greater oxygen supply can enable cable bacteria to harvest a greater 
quantity of electrons from marine sediments. Rapid acclimation strategies and 
highly efficient electron harvesting are likely key advantages of cable 
bacteria, enabling their success in high sulfide generating coastal sediments.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02682-14
PMCID: PMC4292484
PMID: 25416774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]