1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2026 Sep 13:e77699. doi: 10.1002/advs.77699. Online ahead of
print.

Synthetic Shewanella-Bacillus Microbial Consortia for Enhanced Metal Oxide
Leaching From Spent Lithium-Ion Batteries Using Brewing Wastewater as Leaching
Agent.

Zhang B(#)(1), Qiao C(#)(1)(2), Liu H(2), Wang Y(2), Liu Y(1), Yu H(1), Zhang
J(1), Li C(1), Wu D(3), Tang Q(3), Wang Z(2)(4), Zhang D(5), Xu D(5), Li F(2),
Song H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Life and Health Sciences, Northeastern University, Shenyang,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, School of Synthetic Biology and
Biomanufacturing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
(3)Department of Brewing Engineering, Moutai Institute, Renhuai, Guizhou, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Protection and Utilization of
Special Biological Resources in Western China, School of Life Sciences, Ningxia
University, Yinchuan, China.
(5)School of Materials Science and Engineering, Northeastern University,
Shenyang, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The rapid proliferation of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) underscores the need for
recycling, yet existing methods are costly, inefficient, and environmentally
challenging. This work developed a spent LIBs recycling approach using brewing
wastewater and designed a microbial consortium as a biocatalyst for facilitating
metal oxide leaching. The Shewanella oneidensis reduces spent LIBs cathode
LiNixCoyMn1-x-yO2 (NCM) via extracellular electron transfer (EET) by feeding
with brewing wastewater's organics, and the Bacillus subtilis removes residual
ethanol to eliminate inhibition on EET. The catalytic performance is further
enhanced via boosting EET, increasing metal oxide leaching, which, however,
impairs cell viability. To bolster resistance, the global transcriptional factor
IrrE is introduced, achieving a leached metal ion concentration of 102.4 mg L-1,
30.12 times higher than in brewing wastewater. Cellular electrophysiology
analyses reveal that S. oneidensis utilizes c-type cytochromes MtrC and OmcA,
and riboflavin to transfer electrons to NCM. This study proposes a sustainable
"treating waste with waste" technology for recycling spent LIBs.

© 2026 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.77699
PMCID: PMC13572860
PMID: 42733304

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

===== OPEN-ACCESS FULL TEXT (Europe PMC PMC13572860) =====

2933 advsci Advanced Science Adv Sci (Weinh) Wiley PMC13572860 13572860 13572860 42733304 10.1002/advs.77699 Synthetic Shewanella‐Bacillus Microbial Consortia for Enhanced Metal Oxide Leaching From Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries Using Brewing Wastewater as Leaching Agent Zhang Baocai 1 # Qiao Chunxiao 1 2 # Liu Huichun 2 Wang Yiyun 2 Liu Yan 1 Yu Huan 1 Zhang Junqi 1 Li Chao 1 Wu Deguang 3 Tang Qulai 3 Wang Zhiwen 2 4 Zhang Danni 5 Xu Dake 5 Li Feng 2 Song Hao 1 2 ✉
1
 College of Life and Health Sciences, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2
 State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, School of Synthetic Biology and Biomanufacturing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
 Department of Brewing Engineering, Moutai Institute, Renhuai, Guizhou, China
4
 Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Protection and Utilization of Special Biological Resources in Western China, School of Life Sciences, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, China
5
 School of Materials Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China ✉ Corresponding author. # Contributed equally. 13 9 2026 e77699 e77699 15 9 2026 © 2026 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbH This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. ABSTRACT The rapid proliferation of lithium‐ion batteries (LIBs) underscores the need for recycling, yet existing methods are costly, inefficient, and environmentally challenging. This work developed a spent LIBs recycling approach using brewing wastewater and designed a microbial consortium as a biocatalyst for facilitating metal oxide leaching. The Shewanella oneidensis reduces spent LIBs cathode LiNixCoyMn1‐x‐yO2 (NCM) via extracellular electron transfer (EET) by feeding with brewing wastewater's organics, and the Bacillus subtilis removes residual ethanol to eliminate inhibition on EET. The catalytic performance is further enhanced via boosting EET, increasing metal oxide leaching, which, however, impairs cell viability. To bolster resistance, the global transcriptional factor IrrE is introduced, achieving a leached metal ion concentration of 102.4 mg L−1, 30.12 times higher than in brewing wastewater. Cellular electrophysiology analyses reveal that S. oneidensis utilizes c‐type cytochromes MtrC and OmcA, and riboflavin to transfer electrons to NCM. This study proposes a sustainable “treating waste with waste” technology for recycling spent LIBs. Keywords: Bacillus subtilis, brewing wastewater, extracellular electron transfer, microbial consortia, Shewanella oneidensis, spent LIBs recycling, synthetic biology A recycling approach of spent lithium‐ion batteries is developed using brewing wastewater as the leaching agent and an engineering microbial consortium as the biocatalyst. Shewanella oneidensis reduces spent LiNixCoyMn1‐x‐yO2 cathodes via extracellular electron transfer, while Bacillus subtilis removes residual ethanol to eliminate inhibition. This work establishes a sustainable “treating waste with waste” strategy for metal recovery.
 status released display-pdf yes is-olf yes is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Revised 2026 Aug 28; Received 2026 Jan 9; Accepted 2026 Sep 1. 1. Introduction Lithium‐ion batteries (LIBs) are used in a wide range of applications, including communications, transportation and electrical cars etc., [ 1 ], which drive unprecedented growth in LIBs production [ 2 ], resulting in over 11 million tons of spent LIBs are thus globally going to be produced by 2030 [ 3 , 4 , 5 ], thus posing serious environmental risks [ 6 ]. Meanwhile, the International Energy Agency (IEA) warns that LIBs supply chains need to grow tenfold by 2030, which risk depletion of over 70% of global cobalt reserves and underscores the unsustainability of LIBs [ 7 , 8 ]. On the other hand, the content of these metallic elements in spent LIBs is substantially higher than that found in natural ores [ 9 , 10 , 11 ]. Consequently, the recycling of metals from the spent LIBs is of considerable environmental, social, and economic significance. The methods for spent LIBs recycling include direct regeneration, pyrometallurgy, and (bio)hydrometallurgy [ 12 , 13 ]. Direct regeneration of spent LIBs restores electrode materials without full decomposition and resynthesis [ 8 , 13 , 14 ], which avoids expensive purification but requires complex pretreatments, thus limiting scalability [ 4 , 15 ]. Pyrometallurgy processes spent LIBs into metal alloys through smelting [ 16 , 17 ]. Despite its operational simplicity and high metal recovery efficiency, pyrometallurgy demands extreme temperatures, produces toxic gases, and incurs high infrastructure and energy costs. (Bio)Hydrometallurgy leaches metal ions from spent LIBs cathode materials (e.g., Li‐Ni
x
Co
y
MnzO2, NCM, and LiCoO2, LCO) using aqueous leaching agents, which provides many benefits, including high efficiency, better selectivity, and lower energy consumption [ 4 , 18 ]. The leaching agent played a vital role in metal oxide leaching [ 19 , 20 ], and a variety of leaching agents were developed, including inorganic acids (e.g., HCl [ 21 ] and H2SO4 [ 22 ]), organic acids (e.g. oxalic acid [ 23 ], citric acid [ 24 ], and malic acid [ 25 ]), as well as alkalis (e.g., NaOH [ 26 ] and NH3·H2O [ 27 ]). Meanwhile, to enhance metal oxide leaching, (bio)hydrometallurgy commonly necessitates the addition of reductants, such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), which is used to reduce poorly soluble high‐valence metal ions (e.g., Ni3+, Co3+ and Mn4+) to their more soluble lower‐valence counterparts (e.g., Ni2+, Co2+ and Mn2/3+) [ 15 , 28 , 29 , 30 ]. The consumption of large amounts of reductants dramatically increases the (bio)hydrometallurgy treatment cost [ 19 , 20 ], thus, it is necessary to investigate alternative methods (e.g., deep eutectic solvents [ 31 ] and contact‐electro‐catalysis [ 32 ]) to reduce the reliance on these costly reductants. Notably, the organic matter in wastewater, which is rich in carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols, and other compounds, contains abundant electron‐rich functional groups, such as hydroxyl, carboxyl, and aldehyde moieties [ 33 ]. These functional groups significantly impart reducing capabilities, enabling the organic matters to donate electrons to various oxidants, including metal oxides (e.g., MnO2 [ 34 ] and Fe2O3 [ 35 ]), metal ions (e.g., Cu2+ [ 36 ], and Cr6+ [ 37 ]), molecular oxidants (e.g., O3 [ 38 ]), and reactive oxygen species (e.g., ·OH [ 39 ]). The intrinsic reducing equivalents present in this organic matter make wastewater a promising and sustainable alternative to conventional reductants, which not only eliminates the need for costly reductants but also enables high‐value utilization of wastewater, thereby providing a viable approach for achieving cost‐effective and sustainable recycling of spent LIBs. To the best of our knowledge, this strategy has been largely overlooked by previous studies. In this study, a proof‐of‐concept study on spent LIBs recycling using brewing wastewater as the leaching agent was conducted. The organic matter (e.g., lactate and glucose) in the brewing wastewater was utilized as the reductants to reduce spent LIBs cathode materials of LiNixCoyMn1‐x‐yO2 (NCM) for metal oxide leaching, while only a small amount of metal ions was leached out. To this end, a synthetic microbial consortium consisting of S. oneidensis MR‐1 and B. subtilis 168 was designed based on “division of labor”, in which S. oneidensis reduced NCM via EET using lactate, the primary organic matter in brewing wastewater, as an electron donor, and the engineered B. subtilis 168 removed residual ethanol in brewing wastewater via an Adh‐AldH dual enzyme cascade reaction to eliminate the ethanol inhibition on EET of S. oneidensis. This microbial consortium was thus used to catalyze NCM reduction to enable metal oxide leaching using the brewing wastewater, the efficiency of which could be significantly enhanced by further boosting electron shuttle riboflavin‐mediated EET of S. oneidensis. However, the progressive accumulation of metal oxide leaching increased cytotoxicity, decreasing cellular activity and hindering further metal oxide leaching. To bolster resistance against metal ion cytotoxicity, the global transcriptional factor IrrE was introduced into S. oneidensis and B. subtilis, resulting in total leached metal ions of 102.4 mg L−1, 30.12‐fold higher than those in the brewing wastewater without the microbial consortium. Finally, cellular electrophysiology analyses revealed the electron transfer mechanisms underlying the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM catalyzed by the microbial consortium. The electrons generated from lactate catabolism in S. oneidensis could be directly transferred to NCM via outer membrane c‐Cyts MtrC and OmcA, or were first transferred to riboflavin molecules via MtrC and OmcA and then reduced NCM through riboflavin, both of which enhanced metal oxide leaching from NCM. This study demonstrated an innovative strategy for spent LIBs recycling using the brewing wastewater, enabling a sustainable “treating waste with waste” technology. 2. Results 2.1. Design of Dual‐Species Microbial Consortium Catalyzing Reduction of NCM With Brewing Wastewater for Metal Oxide Leaching Leaching of the metal oxide (i.e., Li, Ni, Co, and Mn) from solid‐state NCM necessitates the reduction of high‐valence metal ions (e.g., Ni3+, Co3+, Mn4+) to their lower‐valence counterparts (e.g., Ni2+, Co2+, Mn2/3+), as these ions at lower valence exhibit substantially higher solubility compared to their higher‐valence forms [ 4 , 40 ]. As the dominant organic matters in brewing wastewater, lactate (−0.19 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode, SHE) and glucose (−0.05 V vs. SHE) exhibit a lower redox potential compared to Co3+ (1.82 V vs. SHE), Ni3+ (0.56–0.76 V vs. SHE), and Mn4+ (1.23 V vs. SHE) presented in NCM, suggesting that the reduction of NCM using brewing wastewater is thermodynamically feasible. However, when immersing the cathode material of black mass (the cathode material of spent LIBs, primarily composed of NCM, of which composition was shown in Table S1 ) into the brewing wastewater collected from a brewing factory in Moutai Town (Guizhou Province, China), only a very small amount of metal ions (3.4 mg L−1) was leached from 0.2 g L−1 black mass over 2 week period (Figure  1a ). This was likely attributed to the dissolution of superficially bound and unstable metal oxides rather than the bulk phase reduction process. It was thus speculated that the reduction of NCM by lactate or glucose in brewing wastewater might not proceed spontaneously due to inherent reduction barriers. FIGURE 1 Design of a dual‐species microbial consortium consisting of S. oneidensis and B. subtilis. (a) The concentration of leached metal ions from NCM. (b) Power density curves in microbial fuel cells (MFCs) for S. oneidensis MR‐1 in the presence or absence of ethanol. (c) Schematic diagram of the synthetic microbial consortium consisting of recombinant S. oneidensis MR‐1 and B. subtilis 168 that catalyzes the reduction of NCM using brewing wastewater as the reductant for the purpose of metal oxide leaching. To verify this hypothesis, the metal‐reducing bacterium S. oneidensis MR‐1 was adopted to catalyze the reduction of NCM using brewing wastewater as the reductant, in which S. oneidensis consumed lactate as the electron donor and reduced NCM anaerobically via extracellular electron transfer (EET). The presence of S. oneidensis resulted in an increase in the concentration of total leached metal ions to 15.4 mg L−1 (Figure  1a ), a 4.53‐fold increase compared to the control group, which involved metal oxide leaching from NCM using only the brewing wastewater (3.4 mg L−1). These findings revealed that S. oneidensis overcame reaction barriers and thus initiated and enhanced the reduction of NCM by the brewing wastewater, facilitating metal oxide leaching. Despite the increased metal oxide leaching achieved by S. oneidensis, the leached metal content remained inadequately low, rendering this process unsuitable for applications. Notably, the brewing wastewater typically contains residual ethanol [ 41 ]. Principal component analysis determined that the brewing wastewater used in this study contained 1.8% ethanol by volume. As ethanol is an effective antibacterial agent, it was hypothesized that the ethanol presence in the brewing wastewater could negatively impact the cell viability of S. oneidensis, potentially inhibiting EET. Consequently, the impact of ethanol on EET was examined. The results revealed that the EET rate, as measured by the maximum power density of a microbial fuel cell, was only 2.08 mW m−2 in the presence of ethanol (1.8% v/v) (Figure  1b ). In contrast, in the absence of ethanol, the maximum power density of S. oneidensis was 128.20 mW m−2 (Figure  1b ), which was 61.62‐fold higher than the maximum power density observed in the presence of ethanol. These findings clearly demonstrated that the residual ethanol in the brewing wastewater dramatically hindered EET of S. oneidensis, which would constrain its capacity to catalyze the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM for the purpose of metal oxide leaching. To alleviate ethanol inhibition, subsequently, a synthetic microbial consortium was developed consisting of an ethanol decomposer and a metal reducer (S. oneidensis) based on the principle of “division of labor”, in which the ethanol was removed by the ethanol decomposer Bacillus subtilis, and NCM was reduced by the metal reducer of S. oneidensis via the EET mechanism (Figure  1c ). B. subtilis 168, a Gram‐positive bacterium known for its ability to withstand harsh environmental conditions such as elevated ethanol concentrations [ 42 ], was employed as the ethanol decomposer. To enhance ethanol catabolism, the alcohol dehydrogenase gene (adh) from Saccharomyces cerevisiae BY4341 and the aldehyde dehydrogenase gene (aldH) from Issatchenkia terricola XJ‐2 were co‐overexpressed under the control of the strong promoter P43 in B. subtilis 168, resulting in the recombinant strain BS1 (P43‐adh‐aldH, Table 1 ). Using this engineered B. subtilis strain BS1, the residual ethanol in the brewing wastewater was oxidized to acetaldehyde by alcohol dehydrogenase (Adh), which was subsequently converted into acetate catalyzed by aldehyde dehydrogenase (AldH), constituting a dual‐enzyme cascade reaction that efficiently removed ethanol, thus eliminating ethanol inhibition on the EET efficiency of S. oneidensis. TABLE 1 Genotypes of the engineered S. oneidensis and B. subtilis strains in this study. Strain Genotype relevant characteristic (s) Source SO1 The wild‐type Shewanella oneidensis MR‐1 containing the plasmid pHG13, Cmr. Our lab SO2 SO1 with the Ptac:: ribADEHC operon from Bacillus subtilis 168 integrated at pHG13, Cmr. This study SO3 SO1 with the Ptac:: ribADEHC operon from Bacillus subtilis 168 and irrE gene from Deinococcus radiodurans R1 integrated at pHG13, Cmr. This study BS0 The wild‐type Bacillus subtilis 168 containing the plasmid pCE2, Cmr. Our lab BS1 BS0 with the P43:: adh gene from Saccharomyces cerevisiae BY4341 and aldH gene from Issatchenkia terricola XJ‐2 integrated at pCE2, Cmr. This study BSG3 The strain BSG3 was derived from recombinant B. subtilis 168 (designated as BS120 in previous work [ 45 ]) through microbial mutation breeding and subsequent high‐yield screening aimed at further enhancing riboflavin production, the genotype of which is still unknown. Our lab BS2 BSG3 with the P43:: adh gene from Saccharomyces cerevisiae BY4341 and aldH gene from Issatchenkia terricola XJ‐2 integrated at pCE2, Cmr. This study BS3 BS2 with the P43:: irrE gene from Deinococcus radiodurans R1 integrated at pCE2, Cmr. This study 2.2. Enhanced Metal Oxide Leaching by Engineering the Dual‐Species Microbial Consortia The capacity of strain BS1 in ethanol removal was assessed. When cultivated with the brewing wastewater, strain BS1 achieved a higher maximum cell density (OD600, max of 0.884), while the wild‐type B. subtilis (BS0, Table  1 ) exhibited OD600, max of 0.641 (Figure  2a ). Following 48‐h fermentation, ethanol in the brewing wastewater was effectively consumed by strain BS1, with the ethanol concentration dropping from 1.8% to 0.01% (v/v), corresponding to an ethanol removal efficiency of 99.4% (Figure  2b ). In contrast, the wild‐type strain BS0 removed only approximately 35.6% of ethanol within 48 h, lowering the ethanol concentration from 1.8% to 1.16% (v/v) (Figure  2b ). These findings demonstrated that the Adh‐AldH dual‐enzyme cascade reaction conferred on strain BS1 with an outstanding ethanol catabolic capacity, enabling strain BS1 to rapidly proliferate in the ethanol‐containing brewing wastewater and to efficiently remove the residual ethanol. FIGURE 2 The performance of the SO1‐BS1 consortium in catalyzing the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM to enhance metal oxide leaching. (a) Cell growth profiles of the wild‐type strain B. subtilis 168 (BS0) and the recombinant B. subtilis 168 (BS1) that overexpressed alcohol dehydrogenase Adh and aldehyde dehydrogenase AldH. (b) Volume fraction of ethanol in brewing wastewater treated with the strain BS0, strain BS1, and the SO1‐BS1 consortium. (c) Power density curves of strain SO1, strain BS1, and the SO1‐BS1 consortium. (d) Concentration of total leached metal ions from NCM catalyzed by strain SO1, strain BS1, and the SO1‐BS1 consortium. X‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis of Mn 3p (e) Co 3p (f) and Ni 3p (g) in untreated NCM and brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM catalyzed by the SO1‐BS1 consortium. The microbial consortium SO1‐BS1, comprising the strains S. oneidensis (SO1, Table  1 ) and B. subtilis (P43‐adh‐aldH, BS1), was subsequently constructed. It was found that 97.6% of ethanol in the brewing wastewater could be removed by the SO1‐BS1 microbial consortium within 48 h (Figure  2b ). Moreover, the maximum power density of the SO1‐BS1 consortium reached 116.15 mW m−2, representing 34.47‐ and 92.92‐fold increases compared to that observed in strain SO1 (3.10 mW m−2) and BS1 (1.25 mW m−2), respectively (Figure  2c ), confirming that the ethanol inhibition of the EET of the SO1‐BS1 consortium was significantly alleviated. When applying the SO1‐BS1 consortium to catalyze the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM, 50.7 mg L−1 of the total leached metal ions (including Li, Ni, Co, and Mn) was leached over 2 week period (Figure  2d ), in which the ionic concentrations of Li, Ni, Co, and Mn were 45.6, 2.4, 1.0, and 1.7 mg L−1, respectively (Figure S1 ), and the leaching efficiencies of Li, Ni, Co, and Mn were 57.7%, 9.5%, 11.1%, and 13.1%, respectively. In comparison to the other groups, including treating NCM using the brewing wastewater only (3.4 mg L−1 total leached metal ion), the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM catalyzed by strain SO1 alone (15.4 mg L−1 total leached metal ion), and the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM catalyzed by strain BS1 alone (3.8 mg L−1 total leached metal ion) (Figure  2d ), the total leached metal ions by the SO1‐BS1 consortium increased by 14.91‐, 3.29‐, and 13.34‐fold, respectively. Thus, the microbial consortium demonstrated significantly enhanced efficiency in catalyzing the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM for metal oxide leaching. The oxidation states of the leached metal ions were further analyzed using X‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). As shown in Figure  2e , deconvolution of the Mn 3p spectra in the untreated NCM revealed that Mn4+ (49.8 eV) and Mn3+ (48.6 eV) were the predominant species, accounting for 68.69% and 23.64%, respectively, with Mn2+ (47.8 eV) constituting only approximately 7.67%. Following treatment using brewing wastewater catalyzed by the SO1‐BS1 consortium, the levels of Mn4+ and Mn3+ decreased to 45.40% and 6.80%, whereas the level of Mn2+ increased to 47.80%, respectively, indicating that a substantial fraction of Mn4+ and Mn3+ in NCM was reduced. Likewise, the results of XPS also revealed the reduction of Co3+ and Ni3+ in NCM. Specifically, a significant amount of Co3+ (61.0 eV) was detected in the NCM, accounting for 98.06%, whereas Co2+ (60.3 eV) only constituted a small percentage of 1.94%. Upon treatment, almost exclusively Co2+ was detected based on the fitting results (Figure  2f ). In terms of Ni, the percentages of Ni2+ (67.4 eV) and Ni3+ (68.3 eV) in NCM were 3.07% and 96.93%, respectively. Upon subjection to the SO1‐BS1 consortium‐enhanced reduction, Ni3+ accounted for only 12.96%, and Ni2+ accounted for 87.04% (Figure  2g ). These XPS results demonstrated that the SO1‐BS1 consortium effectively catalyzed the reduction of high‐valence metal species (Mn4
+, Co3
+, and Ni3
+) in NCM to their more soluble lower‐valence forms (Mn2
+, Co2
+, and Ni2
+), thereby facilitating metal oxide leaching. 2.3. Enhancement of EET of Microbial Consortium to Facilitate Metal Oxide Leaching From NCM To facilitate metal oxide leaching, the process of NCM reduction was further enhanced by improving the EET rate of S. oneidensis in the SO1‐BS1 consortium. S. oneidensis mainly employs membrane‐associated c‐type cytochromes (c‐Cyts) and the electron shuttle riboflavin to perform EET, with the EET rate responding more sensitively to changes in riboflavin concentration [ 43 , 44 ]. The riboflavin biosynthesis was thus enhanced in the SO1‐BS1 microbial consortium to boost EET rate. To this end, a riboflavin biosynthesis pathway containing GTP cyclohydrolase II/ 3,4‐dihydroxy‐2‐butanone 4‐phosphate synthase (RibA), pyrimidine deaminase/reductase (RibD), riboflavin synthase (RibE), 6,7‐dimethyl‐8‐ribityllumazine synthase (RibH), and riboflavin kinase (RibC) was first overexpressed in SO1 driven by the promotor of Ptac, resulting in the recombinant strain SO2 (Ptac‐ribA‐ribD‐ribE‐ribH‐ribC) (Figure  3a and Table  1 ). When fed with the brewing wastewater, riboflavin synthesized by the SO2‐BS1 consortium reached 3.65 µm, 13.22‐fold higher than that synthesized by the SO1‐BS1 consortium (0.276 µm, Figure  3b ). Correspondingly, the maximum power density achieved by the SO2‐BS1 consortium rose to 243.71 mW m−2, 2.10‐fold increase relative to the SO1‐BS1 consortium (116.15 mW m−
2, Figure  3c ), demonstrating an improved EET rate of the SO1‐BS1 consortium via enhanced riboflavin synthesis. FIGURE 3 The enhancement of NCM reduction for metal oxide leaching via boosting riboflavin‐mediated EET. (a) Schematic diagram of the enhancement of riboflavin synthesis for boosting the EET of the microbial consortium. For the S. oneidensis MR‐1, the riboflavin synthesis gene operon was expressed in S. oneidensis MR‐1 (strain SO1) to construct the recombinant strain SO2. For B. subtilis, a recombinant B. subtilis 168 that was developed in our previous work was adopted, whose riboflavin synthesis was enhanced through microbial mutation breeding and screening. Abbreviations: RF, riboflavin; RFred, riboflavin in reduced form; RFox, riboflavin in oxidized form; c‐Cyts, c‐type cytochromes of S. oneidensis MR‐1. (b) Concentration of riboflavin synthesized by the microbial consortia of SO1‐BS1, SO2‐BS1, and SO2‐BS2. (c) Power density curves of the consortia of SO1‐BS1, SO2‐BS1, and SO2‐BS2. (d) Concentration of total leached metal ions from NCM catalyzed by the consortia of SO1‐BS1, SO2‐BS1, and SO2‐BS2. The concentrations of lithium (e) nickel (f) cobalt (g) and manganese (h) leached from NCM catalyzed by the consortia of SO1‐BS1, SO2‐BS1, and SO2‐BS2. Subsequently, a recombinant B. subtilis strain (designated as BS120), which was developed in our previous work for efficient riboflavin synthesis [ 45 ], was adopted, and its riboflavin synthesis was further enhanced through microbial mutation breeding. A high‐yield mutant, designated as strain BSG3, was subsequently isolated via screening. Following the transfer of the plasmid pCE2‐P43‐adh‐aldH into BSG3, the recombinant strain BS2 (harboring genomic mutations for riboflavin synthesis and P43‐adh‐aldH in the pCE2 plasmid, Figure  3a and Table  1 ) was constructed, which was subsequently assembled with strain SO2 to form the SO2‐BS2 consortium. When fed with the brewing wastewater, the synthesized riboflavin by the SO2‐BS2 consortium reached 46.00 µM, which was 166.67‐ and 12.60‐fold higher than that of the SO1‐BS1 (0.276 µM) and SO2‐BS1 consortia (3.65 µM), respectively (Figure  3b ). The maximal power density of the SO2‐BS2 consortium reached 347.29 mW m−2, 2.99‐ and 1.42‐fold higher than that of the SO1‐BS1 (116.15 mW m−2) and SO2‐BS1 consortia (243.71 mW m−2), respectively (Figure  3c ), indicating a further improvement in the EET rate of the SO2‐BS2 consortium with increased riboflavin synthesis. The microbial consortium was employed as a biocatalyst to catalyze the reduction of NCM using brewing wastewater for metal oxide leaching. The results showed 64.1 mg L−1 of the metal ions were leached when catalyzed by the SO2‐BS1 consortium, representing a 1.26‐fold increase compared to that catalyzed by the SO1‐BS1 consortium (50.7 mg L−1, Figure  3d ). Furthermore, the maximal metal oxide leaching rate was 16.4 mg L−1·day−1 (the SO2‐BS1 consortium), 1.33 times higher than that catalyzed by SO1‐BS1 biocatalyst (12.3 mg L−1·day−1, Figure S2 ). Specifically, the leached concentrations of Li, Ni, Co, and Mn catalyzed by the SO2‐BS1 consortium reached 53.1, 4.7, 1.9, and 4.4 mg L−1, respectively, achieving leaching efficiencies of 66.5%, 18.6%, 20.2%, and 33.3% (Figure  3e–h ). These results were significantly higher than those observed with the SO1‐BS1 consortium (45.6, 2.4, 1.0, and 1.7 mg L−1, respectively). These findings indicated that the improvement of EET in the dual‐species microbial consortium through the promotion of riboflavin synthesis enhanced its performance in catalyzing the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM, thereby further facilitating metal oxide leaching. In comparison, the concentration of leached metal ions achieved by the SO2‐BS2 consortium, which reached 69.6 mg L−1 (comprising 55.3 mg L−1 Li, 6.3 mg L−1 Ni, 2.8 mg L−1 Co, and 5.1 mg L−1 Mn), along with the maximal leaching rate of 16.2 mg L−1·day−1, was also significantly higher than those observed for the SO1‐BS1 consortium (50.7 mg L−1, 12.3 mg L−1·day−1) (Figure  3d–h ). However, although the EET rate of the SO2‐BS2 consortium (347.29 mW m−2) was 43% higher than that of the SO2‐BS1 consortium (243.71 mW m−2) (Figure  3c ), its metal oxide leaching performance (69.6 mg L−1, 16.2 mg L−1·day−1) did not exhibit a corresponding enhancement compared to the SO2‐BS1 consortium (64.1 mg L−1, 16.4 mg L−1·day−1) (Figure  3d and Figure S2 ). This suggested that, in the case of the SO2‐BS2 consortium, electron transfer rate might no longer constitute the primary rate‐limiting step in further accelerating metal oxide leaching. 2.4. Improvement of Microbial Resistance Against Metal Ion Cytotoxicity To further promote metal oxide leaching, attention was subsequently directed toward the cytotoxicity of leached metal ions, as prior research indicated that cell viability was highly sensitive to the metal ions released from NCM, particularly Co2+ and Ni2+ [ 46 , 47 ]. An in‐depth analysis of the leaching process reflected a significant decrease in the average metal oxide leaching rate during the later stage of the reaction (days 7–14) compared with the initial 6 days for all biocatalysts (the consortia SO1‐BS1, SO2‐BS1, and SO2‐BS2). Specifically, the average leaching rates decreased from 7.222 mg L−1·day−1 to 0.921 mg L−1·day−1 for the SO1‐BS1 consortium, from 9.867 to 0.617 mg L−1·day−1 for the SO2‐BS1 biocatalyst, and from 10.033 to 1.171 mg L−1·day−1 for the SO2‐BS2 consortium, as shown in Figure  4a . It's thus speculated that, as the reaction progressed, the accumulation of leached metal ions led to increased cytotoxicity toward both S. oneidensis and B. subtilis, which impaired cell viability and catalytic activity, thereby exerting a negative feedback effect that inhibited further metal oxide leaching from NCM. FIGURE 4 The enhancement of cell resistance against metal ion cytotoxicity via expressing the global transcriptional factor IrrE in S. oneidensis and B. subtilis. (a) The average rate of metal oxide leaching. (b) Schematic of the improvement of cell resistance against metal ion cytotoxicity via overexpressing the global transcriptional factor IrrE. Ni2+ and Co2+ can bind to adenine and guanine in DNA, catalyzing Fenton‐like reactions that produce ROS and cause DNA damage. The expression of IrrE increases superoxide dismutase levels to reduce intracellular ROS and activates the SOS response for DNA repair. (c) DNA tail length, which was measured from fluorescence images of the comet assay in Figure S3 . For each experimental group, 50 cells were selected for tail length measurement. (d) Quantification of intracellular ROS levels using the CM‐H2DCFDA fluorescent probe. (e) Cell growth profiles of strains SO2 (in the absence of Ni2+ and Co2+), SO2 (in the presence of Ni2+ and Co2+), and SO3 (in the presence of Ni2+ and Co2+). (f) Cell growth profiles of strains BS2 (in the absence of Ni2+ and Co2+), BS2 (in the presence of Ni2+ and Co2+), and BS3 (in the presence of Ni2+ and Co2+). (g) Fluorescence microscopy images of the strains SO2 (in the absence of Ni2+ and Co2+), SO2 (in the presence of Ni2+ and Co2+), SO3 (in the presence of Ni2+ and Co2+), BS2 (in the absence of Ni2+ and Co2+), BS2 (in the presence of Ni2+ and Co2+), and BS3 (in the presence of Ni2+ and Co2+). (h) Concentration of total leached metal ions from NCM catalyzed by the SO3‐BS3 consortium. Results from three independent experiments are expressed as means and standard errors. To improve the resistance of the microbial consortium against the leached metal ions, the global transcriptional factor IrrE, which originates from the extremophile Deinococcus radiodurans R1 [ 48 ], was overexpressed in strains SO1 and BS2, respectively, obtaining the recombinant strains SO3 (Ptac‐ribA‐ribD‐ribE‐ribH‐ribC‐irrE) and BS3 (P43‐adh‐aldH‐irrE), respectively (Figure  4b and Table  1 ). The IrrE enables the bacterium to withstand extreme environments by repairing DNA damage [ 49 ] and scavenging intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) [ 50 ]. To verify these protective mechanisms, we assessed the impact of irrE overexpression on DNA damage and intracellular ROS levels in S. oneidensis cells upon exposure to 6 mg L−1 Ni2+ and 3 mg L−1 Co2+. Specifically, a comet assay was employed to evaluate DNA damage, utilizing the electrophoretic DNA tail length as a quantitative indicator of strand breakage [ 49 ]. The results revealed that irrE overexpression significantly relieved DNA damage, reducing DNA tail lengths by 63.9% (from 13.3 to 4.8 µm) in S. oneidensis and 54.2% (from 31.0 to 14.2 µm) in B. subtilis (Figure  4c and Figure S3 ). Concurrently, the CM‐H2DCFDA fluorescent probe analysis [ 51 ] demonstrated that irrE overexpression effectively scavenged intracellular ROS, decreasing fluorescence intensity by 67.8% and 67.4% in S. oneidensis and B. subtilis, respectively (Figure  4d ). Collectively, these findings directly evidenced that IrrE enhanced bacterial tolerance to Ni2+ and Co2+ primarily through DNA repair and ROS scavenging. To determine whether these molecular‐level protections correspond to enhanced cellular growth and viability, the recombinant strains were further evaluated. When exposed to 6 mg L−1 Ni2+ and 3 mg L−1 Co2+, the growth of strain SO2 was notably inhibited, with its maximum cell density decreasing from 1.941 (in the absence of Ni2+ and Co2+) to 1.367 (Figure  4e ). In comparison, strain SO3, which overexpressed IrrE, attained higher cell density (OD600, max = 2.291) under the identical conditions (Figure  4e ). Likewise, strain BS2 experienced growth inhibition under 6 mg L−1 Ni2+ and 3 mg L−1 Co2+ stress, whereas the introduction of IrrE into strain BS3 relieved the cytotoxicity of Ni2+ and Co2+, increasing the maximum cell density of strain BS3 to 1.175 from 0.830 (strain BS2 exposed to Ni2+(6 mg L−1) and Co2+(3 mg L−1); Figure  4f ). Meanwhile, Live‐dead staining also revealed that strains SO2 and BS2 exhibited more pronounced red fluorescence in the presence of Ni2+ and Co2+ (Figure  4g ), indicating a higher prevalence of dead cells due to Ni2+ and Co2+ exposure. The overexpression of IrrE in strains SO3 and BS3 resulted in a noticeable reduction in the abundance of dead cells (Figure  4g ), consistent with the observed growth patterns. In addition, it was found that Li+ (100 mg L−1) and Mn2+ (10 mg L−1) exhibited negligible inhibitory effects on the growth of S. oneidensis MR‐1 and B. subtilis 168, and overexpression of IrrE could not further enhance cell growth in the presence of Li+ or Mn2+ (Figure S4a,b ). These results demonstrated that the leached Co2+ and Ni2+ ions exerted significant growth inhibition on the cells of Shewanella and Bacillus, and that overexpression of the irrE gene markedly enhanced their resistance to Co2+ and Ni2+, thus improving cell viability under Ni2+ and Co2+ stress. The SO3‐BS3 consortium was subsequently assembled to catalyze the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM for metal oxide leaching. In the presence of the SO3‐BS3 consortium, the total leached metal ion concentration was significantly increased. Specifically, the total leached metal ions reached 102.4 mg L−1, which comprised 80.8, 8.5, 5.2, and 7.9 mg L−1 for Li, Ni, Co, and Mn, respectively, corresponding to the leaching efficiencies of ∼100% for Li, 35.1% for Ni, 58.4% for Co, and 61.8% for Mn (Figure  4h and Figure S5 ). The total leached metal ions represented 1.47‐fold improvement compared to the SO2‐BS2 biocatalyst (69.6 mg L−1, including 55.3 mg L−1 Li, 6.3 mg L−1 Ni, 2.8 mg L−1 Co, and 5.1 mg L−1 Mn, underscoring the enhanced catalytic performance of the SO3‐BS3 consortium. Moreover, in the process of metal oxide leaching catalyzed by the SO3‐BS3 consortium, the average leaching rate in the later stage (days 7–14) increased to 3.575 mg L−1·day−1, 3.05‐fold increase compared to that of the SO2‐BS2 consortium (1.171 mg L−1·day−1) (Figure  4a ). These findings demonstrated that overexpression of the irrE gene enhanced the resistance of Shewanella and Bacillus against the cytotoxicity of the leached Ni2+ and Co2+, which enabled the SO3‐BS3 consortium elevated and prolonged capacity of catalyzing the NCM reduction, thereby promoting the efficiency of metal oxide leaching. 2.5. Electron Transfer Mechanisms Underlying Brewing Wastewater‐Mediated Reduction of NCM Catalyzed by Microbial Consortia To elucidate the EET mechanism, NCM was first observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). It was found that a large number of cells were attached to the NCM surface when the NCM reduction was catalyzed by the SO3‐BS3 consortium (Figure  5a , SO3‐BS3), which disrupted the original NCM morphology (Figure  5a , Untreated). These cells attached to the NCM surface were isolated, and the species distribution was subsequently analyzed via colony morphology identification. This study showed that the relative abundance of S. oneidensis on the NCM surface was 51.14% for the SO1‐BS1 consortium, 63.28% for the SO2‐BS2 consortium, and 69.38% for the SO3‐BS3 consortium, as illustrated in Figure  5b . The higher relative abundance of S. oneidensis on NCM surface for SO2‐BS2 and SO3‐BS3 consortia than that of the SO1‐BS1 consortium was most likely due to the biosynthesis of riboflavin, which could facilitate S. oneidensis adherence to the electron acceptor (e.g., electrode in MFC) for biofilm formation [ 52 ]. FIGURE 5 The EET mechanisms underlying brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM catalyzed by the microbial consortium. (a) SEM images of NCM. The scale bars of the SEM images were 3 and 1 µm, respectively. The reported results were checked for consistency with three individual experiments. (b) Proportion of S. oneidensis MR‐1 distributed on the NCM surface. (c) Power density curves of the consortia of SO3∆mtrC‐BS3, SO3∆omcA‐BS3, SO3∆mtrC∆omcA‐BS3, and SO3‐BS3. (d) Concentrations of total leached metal ions from NCM catalyzed by strain BS3, and consortia of SO3∆mtrC‐BS3, SO3∆omcA‐BS3, SO3∆mtrC∆omcA‐BS3, and SO3‐BS3. (e) The absorption spectra of riboflavin. This figure shows the absorption spectra of riboflavin in its fully oxidized and fully reduced states, as well as the spectra of reduced riboflavin after reacting with NCM anaerobically for 5, 15, 25, 35, 45, and 55 min. (f) Electron transfer mechanisms underlying brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM catalyzed by the SO3‐BS3 consortium. In the SO3‐BS3 consortium, strain BS3 converted ethanol in the brewing wastewater into acetate, removing ethanol's inhibition of the EET of strain SO3. Strain BS3 produced riboflavin from glucose, which acted as the electron shuttle to enhance EET. Meanwhile, strain SO3 catabolized lactate to generate electrons and riboflavin. The electrons produced by strain SO3 reduce NCM for metal oxide leaching, either directly via outer membrane c‐Cyts MtrC and OmcA or indirectly through riboflavin, thereby accelerating the leaching process. Abbreviations: AdH alcohol dehydrogenase, AldH aldehyde dehydrogenase, GTP Guanosine‐5’‐triphosphate, PPP pentose phosphate pathway, OAA oxaloacetic acid, PEP phosphoenolpyruvate, R5P ribulose‐5‐phosphate. MQ(H2) methyl naphthoquinone, NqrBCDEF Na+‐translocating NADH‐quinone reductase. MtrC and OmcA decaheme c‐Cyts, MtrB β‐barrel trans‐OM protein, MtrA periplasmic decaheme c‐Cyts, CymA inner membrane tetraheme c‐Cyts. Subsequently, it was explored how electrons were transferred from S. oneidensis to NCM for reduction. To this end, the genes encoding the critical c‐Cytochromes (MtrC and OmcA) in the EET conduits of S. oneidensis were individually or simultaneously deleted in strain SO3 using the homologous recombination method, resulting in the mutant strains SO3∆mtrC, SO3∆omcA, and SO3∆mtrC∆omcA. The results showed that the SO3∆mtrC‐BS3 consortium (47.67 mW m−2), the SO3∆omcA‐BS3 consortium (50.01 mW m−2), and the SO3∆mtrC∆omcA‐BS3 consortium (28.39 mW m−2) showed 9.50‐, 9.05‐, and 15.95‐fold decreases in the EET rate compared to the SO3‐BS3 consortium (452.90 mW m−2), respectively (Figure  5c ), confirming that the disruption of MtrC and OmcA significantly inhibited the EET process in strain SO3. Correspondingly, compared with the total leached metal ions catalyzed by the SO3‐BS3 microbial consortium (102.4 mg L−1), the contents of leached metal ions catalyzed by the SO3∆mtrC‐BS3 consortium (16.7 mg L−1), the SO3∆omcA‐BS3 microbial consortium (18.7 mg L−1), and the SO3∆mtrC∆omcA‐BS3 consortium (13.4 mg L−1) were dramatically decreased by 6.13‐, 5.48‐, and 7.64‐fold, respectively (Figure  5d ). Notably, the leached metal ions catalyzed by the SO3∆mtrC∆omcA‐BS3 consortium (13.4 mg L−1) exhibited negligible difference from that catalyzed by the sole strain BS3 (13.4 mg L−1), suggesting that MtrC and OmcA in S. oneidensis were essential for NCM reduction in metal oxide leaching. In addition, the interaction between NCM and riboflavin was further investigated. The concentrated riboflavin underwent complete chemical reduction to its reduced form, after which the NCM suspension was introduced to conduct its anaerobic reduction. The reduction process of NCM was monitored by assessing the ratio of oxidized to reduced riboflavin, which illustrated the progressive oxidation of reduced riboflavin by NCM over time, as evidenced by the increasing absorbance peaks at 375 and 445 nm (Figure  5e ), aligning with the characteristic absorption peaks of the oxidized riboflavin [ 53 ]. The intensification of these peaks as the reaction advances substantiated the ability of riboflavin to reduce NCM. Also, it was reported that MtrC and OmcA responded to the reduction of riboflavin in S. oneidensis [ 54 ]. Therefore, the riboflavin molecules captured electrons from the cells of S. oneidensis via MtrC and OmcA, which then reduced NCM and accelerated metal oxide leaching. Based on these results, the EET mechanisms underlying the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM catalyzed by the SO3‐BS3 consortium were refined (Figure  5f ). When catalyzing the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM for metal oxide leaching, strain BS3 in the SO3‐BS3 consortium eliminated the ethanol inhibition on EET of S. oneidensis by converting residual ethanol in the brewing wastewater into acetate via the Adh‐AldH dual enzyme cascade reaction. Also, strain BS3 synthesized riboflavin, which was employed as an electron shuttle for promoting the EET of S. oneidensis. Meanwhile, strain SO3 in the SO3‐BS3 consortium catabolized lactate for intracellular electron generation and riboflavin synthesis. The generated electrons were then used to reduce NCM via the EET mechanism. Specifically, the electrons generated from strain SO3 could be either directly transferred to NCM via outer membrane c‐Cyts MtrC and OmcA, or first transferred to riboflavin molecules via MtrC and OmcA. then reduced NCM by the reduced‐state riboflavin, both of which enhance metal oxide leaching from NCM. 2.6. Economic Viability of the Metal Oxide Leaching From Spent LIBs Using Brewing Wastewater Catalyzed by the SO3‐BS3 Consortia To recover multiple metal ions (Li, Ni, Co, and Mn) from the leachate, a Stepwise Precipitation approach was developed for the sequential separation and purification of high‑purity metal salts, the schematic diagram of which was illustrated in Figure S6 . Briefly, the separation process involved the sequential precipitation of Ni and Co using dimethylglyoxime and oxalic acid, followed by the solvent extraction of Mn utilizing saponified D2EHPA, and concluded with the final precipitation of Li using H3PO4. Through the Stepwise Precipitation approach, 0.822 mg of Ni (as Ni(C4H6N2O2)2, Figure  6a ), 0.506 mg of Co (as CoC2O4, Figure  6b ), 0.762 mg of Mn (as MnSO4, Figure  6c ), and 7.310 mg of Li (as Li3PO4, Figure  6d ) were selectively recovered from 100 mL leachate. The final recovery efficiency and purity of each metallic component were individually evaluated. The results showed that 96.7% of Ni, 97.4% of Co, 96.4% of Mn, and 90.5% of Li were recovered (Figure  6e ), with the purity of 99.6%, 99.2%, 98.8%, and 99.2%, respectively (Figure  6f ). These results demonstrated that this Stepwise Precipitation approach validated the feasibility of recovering high‐purity metal salts directly from complex biological leachates. FIGURE 6 Stepwise Precipitation approach for separation and recovery of metal salts from the leachate and the economic analysis. (a) Mass of Ni, Co, Mn and Li in Ni(C4H6N2O2)2. (b) Mass of Ni, Co, Mn, and Li in CoC2O4. (c) Mass of Ni, Co, Mn, and Li in MnSO4. (d) Mass of Ni, Co, Mn, and Li in Li3PO4. (e) Recovery efficiency of the Ni, Co, Mn, and Li from the leaching solution via the Stepwise Precipitation approach. (f) Corresponding purities of the isolated Ni (Ni(C4H6N2O2)2), Co (CoC2O4), Mn (MnSO4), and Li (Li3PO4) products. (g) Detailed cost breakdown of the recovery process by process area. The costs were categorized into four types: reagent cost, energy consumption, antibiotic cost, and inducer cost. Data were calculated per kg of black mass processed. (h) Cost and revenue streams per kg of black mass processed. Negative and positive values represent costs and revenues, respectively. The economic feasibility of the entire process was subsequently evaluated at an industrial scale, using 1 kg of black mass of NCM as the functional unit for cost‐benefit accounting analysis. The techno‐economic parameters utilized for this assessment were provided in Table S2 . Based on these fundamental parameters, the economic assessment was systematically structured around comprehensive cost inputs and revenues. On the cost side, the total operational expenses were categorized into three sequential stages, namely the seed culture, leaching, and separation processes, which comprehensively covered basal reagents (e.g., culture media components, the NCM black mass, and chemical precipitants/extractants), reagents for plasmid maintenance and gene expression (e.g., chloramphenicol and IPTG), and process‐specific energy consumption (cultivation, heating, and filtration). On the revenue side, the gross revenue was derived from two distinct streams, comprising the commercial value of the recovered high‐purity metal salts (Li3PO4, Ni(C4H6N2O2)2, CoC2O4, and MnSO4) and the environmental revenue from treating brewing wastewater. According to the assessment (Table S2 and Note S1 ), the proposed technology achieved a net profit of 5.754$ kg−1 of NCM black mass, thus demonstrating the economic feasibility of the proposed technology. This profit margin was excellent and highly competitive in comparison to traditional chemical leaching technologies, such as HCl (∼0.2$ kg−1) [ 55 ] and acetic acid (∼1.105$ kg−1) [ 56 ]. Our system maintained strong profitability despite the costs associated with the antibiotic and inducer. The utilization of brewing wastewater contributed to this economic viability. On the one hand, it generated supplementary environmental treatment revenue. In addition, it also served as a zero‐cost complex nutrient source, completely eliminating the need for conventional culture media. Regarding the cost for engineered strain cultivation, the antibiotic (chloramphenicol in this work) accounted for only 2.4% and 0.55% of the combined costs of the seed culture and leaching processes, respectively, indicating that stable plasmid maintenance was not a major economic burden for this process (Figure  6g ). Conversely, the reliance on IPTG posed a significant economic bottleneck. Our analysis revealed that IPTG accounted for an overwhelming 79.8% of the total operational costs (Figure  6h ). To fully realize its industrial potential, future efforts must focus on optimizing the engineered consortia by replacing IPTG‐inducible systems with auto‐inducible or constitutive promoters, thereby completely eliminating the inducer‐associated costs. 3. Discussions In this study, synthetic microbial consortia were developed based on the principle of “division of labor” for spent LIBs recycling using brewing wastewater, in which S. oneidensis reduced NCM via EET using the organics in the brewing wastewater as the reductants, and B. subtilis removed residual ethanol in brewing wastewater to eliminate ethanol inhibition on EET of S. oneidensis. To verify the feasibility, the brewing wastewater collected from a brewing factory in Moutai Town, Guizhou Province, China, was utilized to treat NCM anaerobically, but only a very small amount of metal ions (3.4 mg L−1) was leached out (Figure  7 ). The metal‐reducing bacterium S. oneidensis was subsequently introduced, resulting in a 4.53‐fold increase in leached metal ions (15.4 mg L−1, Figure  7 ), despite the fact that the EET of S. oneidensis was significantly inhibited by residual ethanol in brewing wastewater (Figure  1b ). These findings reflected the workability of brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM for metal oxide leaching catalyzed by a metal‐reducing bacterium. FIGURE 7 Enhancement of metal oxide leaching upon gradual optimization of the engineered S. oneidensis MR‐1‐B. subtilis 168 microbial consortia. To enhance the metal oxide leaching, the alcohol dehydrogenase (Adh) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (AldH) were overexpressed (strain BS1) to remove residual ethanol via the Adh‐AldH dual enzyme cascade reaction, thereby eliminating the ethanol inhibition on the EET of strain SO1 in reducing NCM (recombinant S. oneidensis). The removal of ethanol significantly improved the EET rate of the SO1‐BS1 consortium (Figure  2c ), leading to the total leached metal ions concentration increase from 15.4 mg L−1 (strain SO1 alone) to 50.7 mg L−1 (Figure  7 ). Subsequently, the EET rate of the SO1‐BS1 consortium was further improved by promoting the synthesis of the electron shuttle riboflavin (Figure  3c ), resulting in total leached metal ions of 69.6 mg L−1 (SO2‐BS2 microbial consortium, Figure  7 ). However, the progressive accumulation of leached Ni2+ and Co2+ increased cytotoxicity (Figure  4b,c ), which decreased cellular activity and, in turn, hindered further metal oxide leaching. To relieve the cytotoxicity of Ni2+ and Co2+, the global transcriptional regulator IrrE was overexpressed in strains SO2 and BS2, resulting in the formation of the SO3‐BS3 consortium. The Ni2+ and Co2+ can bind to adenine and guanine bases in DNA and catalyze Fenton‐like reactions within cells, leading to the generation of ROS, thus causing DNA damage [ 57 ]. IrrE enables cells to upregulate the expression of superoxide dismutase, which is instrumental in scavenging intracellular ROS [ 50 ], and activates the cellular SOS response to facilitate DNA repair [ 48 ]. Consequently, the presence of IrrE significantly enhanced the resistance of strains SO3 and BS3 to Ni2+‐ and Co2+‐induced cytotoxicity (Figure  4b,c ). This enhancement led to a substantial increase in the concentration of total leached metal ions, reaching 102.4 mg L−1 when catalyzed by the SO3‐BS3 consortium, which was 30.12‐fold higher than that observed in brewing wastewater without the consortium (Figure  7 ). Thus, these efforts achieved a substantial increase in leached metal ions from NCM. Previous study suggested that leached Ni2+ and Co2+ compromise cell viability [ 47 , 58 ]. However, engineering strategies to enhance cellular resistance to Ni2+‐ and Co2+ ‐induced cytotoxicity in the context of spent LIBs recycling have not been developed. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to demonstrate that the global transcriptional regulator IrrE can protect cells from Ni2+‐induced and Co2+‐induced cytotoxicity, thereby significantly enhancing the leaching of metal oxides. Comprehensive analyses of cellular electrophysiology were conducted to elucidate the EET mechanisms underlying the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM catalyzed by microbial consortia. It was found that the outer membrane c‐Cyts MtrC and OmcA in S. oneidensis were essential for the reduction of NCM for metal oxide leaching (Figure  5d ). Additionally, riboflavin in its reduced form could be oxidized by NCM (Figure  5e ). Therefore, the electron transfer mechanisms were refined (Figure  5f ). In the process of the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM catalyzed by the SO3‐BS3 consortium, strain BS3 eliminated the ethanol inhibition on the EET of S. oneidensis by removing residual ethanol and synthesized riboflavin as the electron shuttle. Strain SO3 catabolized lactate for intracellular electron generation and riboflavin biosynthesis. The generated electrons were then used to reduce NCM for metal oxide leaching via EET. Specifically, the electrons generated from strain SO3 could be either directly transferred to NCM via outer membrane c‐Cyts MtrC and OmcA, or first transferred to riboflavin via MtrC and OmcA, then used to reduce NCM by the reduced‐state riboflavin. These two EET mechanisms underlie the enhanced metal oxide leaching from NCM. We systematically benchmarked our approach against both traditional chemical leaching (inorganic/organic acids) and conventional bioleaching (bacterial and fungal). Briefly, inorganic acids (e.g., H2SO4 and HCl) and organic acids (e.g., citric acid, malic acid, and acetic acid), when used in combination with exogenous reducing agents, typically achieved leaching efficiencies exceeding 90% for all target metals [ 25 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 ] (Table S3 ). In bioleaching systems, bacterial processes employing Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans or Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans generally yielded Li recoveries in the range of 31%–82%, while Ni, Co, and Mn efficiencies remained below 37% [ 63 , 64 , 65 ] (Table S4 ). Fungal‐based bioleaching using Aspergillus niger achieved markedly higher performance, with Li extraction reaching 93%–100%, Mn 70%–90%, and Ni and Co 38%–87% under optimized conditions [ 66 , 67 ] (Table S4 ). Our proposed microbial consortium achieved leaching efficiencies of ∼100% for Li, 35.1% for Ni, 58.4% for Co, and 61.8% for Mn. While the recovery of Li was highly competitive, the leaching efficiencies for the transition metals (Ni, Co, and Mn) remained lower than those achieved by inorganic acids, organic acids, and fungal bioleaching systems. Despite lacking a prominent edge in transition metal extraction at this proof‐of‐concept stage, our “treating waste with waste” strategy presented substantial operational, economic, and environmental advantages over these established technologies. Conventional chemical leaching (inorganic or organic) typically required elevated temperatures (50°C–80°C) [ 59 , 68 ], posed risks of corrosive gas emissions (e.g., Cl2 [ 60 ] or SOx [ 69 ]), and inherently relied on high‐concentration acids alongside costly chemical reducing agents like H2O2 [ 70 ]. Similarly, traditional bioleaching systems demanded energy‐intensive aeration, continuous mechanical agitation, and expensive addition of exogenous culture media. In contrast, our synthetic consortium operated anaerobically under mild ambient conditions (30°C) without the addition of any chemical reductants. By directly utilizing brewing wastewater as a zero‐cost nutrient source and leaching agent, the leaching process in our work completely eliminated the energy burden of aeration, the cost of supplementary reductants, and the generation of strongly acidic secondary effluents. This perfectly aligned with circular economy principles and demonstrated highly robust economic feasibility. Ultimately, our process achieved an excellent net profit of 5.754$ kg−1 of NCM black mass, which was substantially higher than the profit margins typically obtained from traditional acid leaching methods. It should be recognized that while the present work established a robust proof‐of‐concept at the laboratory scale, several lines of investigation were still required to translate this approach into a practically viable industrial process. First, the leaching efficiencies for transition metals (Ni, Co, and Mn) through the proposed approach in this work remained lower than those of chemical processes. Therefore, key operational parameters, such as the inoculation ratio of S. oneidensis to B. subtilis, the pulp density of the NCM black mass, and cultivation strategies (e.g., fed‐batch or continuous operations), needed to be systematically optimized to maximize metal oxide leaching kinetics and overall efficiencies. Second, to eliminate the costs associated with antibiotics and inducers during large‐scale applications, the expression cassettes of the functional genes should be integrated directly into the host chromosomes under the control of constitutive promoters. This genomic integration will completely obviate the need for antibiotic addition for plasmid maintenance and IPTG supplementation for gene expression, which not only significantly reduces operational costs but also guarantees biosafety and regulatory compliance. In addition, the long‐term stability and reproducibility of the microbial consortium at a larger scale needed to be thoroughly considered, in particular under the condition of natural fluctuations in raw brewing wastewater compositions (e.g., varying organic loads or pH levels across different batches). 4. Conclusions This study developed microbial consortia comprising engineered S. oneidensis and B. subtilis, which enabled efficient recycling of spent LIBs utilizing brewing wastewater as the leaching agent to achieve metal oxide leaching. Through synthetic biology engineering strategies, the EET rate of the microbial consortia was promoted by enhancing biosynthesis of riboflavin, thereby further enhancing the leaching of metal oxides. Nevertheless, the progressive accumulation of leached Ni2+ and Co2+ adversely affected cell viability, consequently impeding further metal oxide leaching. To address this challenge, the global transcriptional factor IrrE was overexpressed to enhance resistance to the cytotoxicity of Ni2+ and Co2+, resulting in a significant increase in the concentration of leached metal ions, reaching 102.4 mg L−1, which was 30.12‐fold higher than that achieved with brewing wastewater alone. Besides, the EET mechanisms underlying the brewing wastewater‐mediated reduction of NCM catalyzed by microbial consortia were elucidated, revealing that electrons generated from S. oneidensis could be transferred to NCM either via MtrC and OmcA directly, or via the electron shuttle riboflavin indirectly. This study highlighted the potential for recycling spent LIBs using organic matter‐bearing wastewater, and thus achieving a sustainable “treating waste with waste” technology. 5. Materials and Methods 5.1. Gene Synthesis and Plasmid Construction The genes for alcohol dehydrogenase, aldehyde dehydrogenase, and a global transcriptional factor were screened and extracted from the NCBI database. After gene sequence codon optimization with an online tool ( http://www.jcat.de/ ), the designed open reading frame with promoter and RBS was synthesized in vitro and assembled into plasmids pCE2 or pHG13, respectively. Plasmid pCE2 and its derivatives were transformed into Bacillus subtilis 168 strain (ATCC33234). Construction of plasmid pHG13 and its derivatives was performed in E. coli WM3064. The E. coli WM3064 was employed to transfer plasmids into Shewanella oneidensis MR‐1 strain (ATCC700550) through conjugation. All strains used in this experiment were from strains kept in our laboratory. 5.2. Culture of the B. subtilis‐S. oneidensis Consortium and Dissolution of LIBs To establish a consortium of B. subtilis and S. oneidensis, both microorganisms were initially cultured in Luria‐Bertani (LB) medium containing 10 g L−1 NaCl, 5 g L−1 yeast extract, and 10 g L−1 peptone (Aladdin, Shanghai), which was supplemented with 0.2 g L−1 chloramphenicol for plasmid. Overnight cultures of each strain were subsequently inoculated into a medium formulated with brewing water collected from a brewing factory in Moutai Town (Guizhou) at a 1% (v/v) ratio, induced by the isopropyl‐β‐d‐thiogalactoside (IPTG, 0.5 mm, Heowns, Tianjin) for gene expression. Following a brief period of subculturing, the culture was transferred into anaerobic bottles, supplemented with 0.2 g L−1 of black mass (Tianzhongbao, Beijing), and purged with air for 15 min. Anaerobic fermentation was then conducted at 30°C for a period of 14 days to facilitate the dissolution of LIBs. Upon completion of the dissolution process, samples were collected to quantify the concentrations of dissolved lithium (Li), nickel (Ni), cobalt (Co), and manganese (Mn) from the LIBs in the liquid medium. Sampling occurred at various time intervals (0, 1, 2, 6, 10, and 14 days). To isolate the dissolved metals, centrifugation was performed at 13 500 rpm for 1 min. The resulting solutions were subsequently diluted with 2% HNO3 and 10% H2O2 to remove organic matter, and the pH was adjusted to 3–4 using the NaOH solution in preparation for inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP‐OES) analysis. Each experiment was conducted in triplicate. 5.3. Microbial Fuel Cell Setup An H‐type two‐chamber cell with a working volume of 140 mL was employed to establish a microbial fuel cell, wherein a Nafion 117 membrane served as the proton exchange membrane, effectively separating the anode and cathode compartments. In the anodic chamber, a carbon cloth measuring 1 cm × 1 cm functioned as the anodic electrode. The bacterial cells cultured in brewing wastewater were introduced into the anode compartment. The cathodic electrode consisted of a carbon cloth measuring 2.5 cm × 3 cm, and a solution of 50 mm potassium ferrocyanide in 50 mm phosphate buffer (composed of 50 mm K2HPO4 and 50 mm KH2PO4, Aladdin, Shanghai) was utilized as the cathodic electron donor. The output voltages across a 2 kΩ resistor were recorded at a temperature of 30°C. 5.4. Electrochemical Analyses Using a CHI1000C multichannel electrochemical workstation (CH Instrument, Shanghai, China), the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) analysis was employed to obtain the polarization curves for maximum power density and maximum current density calculation. In LSV, the scan rate was set to 0.1 mV s−1. The maximum power density (P) and current density (I) were calculated using Equations S1 and S2 , respectively.
 (1) P = V × I S (2) I = I P S where V is the voltage; Ip is the maximum current in the polarization curve, and S is the projected area of the anode. 5.5. Analysis of the Inhibitory Effect of Ethanol on EET
S. oneidensis MR‐1 was initially cultured in LB medium. Overnight culture was added to a test medium at a 1% (v/v) ratio, used to set up the microbial fuel cell and electrochemical analyses as described in Materials and Methods 5.3–5.4. For the analysis of the inhibitory effect of ethanol on EET, the test medium contained 15 g L−1 lactate, 4 g L−1 glucose, 6.78 g L−1 Na2HPO4, 3 g L−1 KH2PO4, 0.5 g L−1 NaCl, 1 g L−1 NH4Cl, 0.1 mm MgSO4, 0.1 mm CaCl2 (Aladdin, Shanghai) and 1.8% (v/v) ethanol (Controlled group was without ethanol). 5.6. Ethanol Measurement The ethanol degradation by bacteria was analyzed using the Biological Sensing Analyzer (SBA‐40D, Biology Institute of Shandong Academy of Sciences, China). An overnight bacterial culture was inoculated at 1% (v/v) into 100 mL of brewing wastewater and incubated at 30°C with shaking at 250 rpm. Samples were taken every 6 h over a 48‐h period. Each sample was centrifuged at 10 000 rpm to collect the supernatant, which was diluted with deionized water to 1/5 and subsequently filtered through a 0.22 µm aqueous‐phase filter membrane. Before testing, the analyzer was calibrated with deionized water and 1% ethanol. 5.7. Riboflavin Measurement Riboflavin concentration was determined using an HPLC system (Shimadzu, Japan). A 1 mL aliquot of the bacterial culture was centrifuged to retain the supernatant. Subsequently, 200 µL of the supernatant was filtered through a 0.22 µm aqueous filter membrane to prepare the HPLC sample. The analysis of riboflavin was conducted using an Aminex HPX‐87H column (300 mm × 7.8 mm), performed using a Shim‐pack GIS C18 column (250 mm × 2.5 mm, 5 µm) with a mobile phase of 30% methanol and 70% 0.1% NaH2PO4. A UV detector at 260 nm was used, with the column at 35°C, a flow rate of 1 mL min−1, and an injection volume of 10 µL. 5.8. Analyses of the Surface of Black Mass Before and After the Reaction For solid‐state analysis, residual solids were extracted from the reactor via centrifugation. The samples underwent two sequential washings with distilled water and ethanol. Subsequently, the washed samples were subjected to vacuum freeze‐drying. The oxidation states of both pristine and reacted black mass of NCM were characterized using X‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB XI+, Thermo Scientific, America). Particular attention was given to the analysis of the 3p orbitals of Ni, Co, and Mn, as these elements demonstrate significant variation in their oxidation states. Energy calibration of the XPS data was conducted using the C 1s peak. Morphological characteristics were examined using a field‐emission scanning electron microscope (FE‐SEM, JSM‐7900F, Jeol). 5.9. Cell Viability Quantification A single bacterial colony was inoculated into 5 mL of LB medium and incubated overnight. Subsequently, the overnight culture was introduced at a 1% (v/v) inoculum ratio into the test medium as described in Materials and Methods 5.5 without ethanol. This medium was supplemented with either 6 mg L−1 of Ni2+ and 3 mg L−1 of Co2+, or 100 mg L−1 of Li+ and 10 mg L−1 of Mn2+. Samples were taken over a 48‐h period. The optical density of the bacterial suspension at 600 nm was determined using a UV‐visible spectrophotometer (T6, Persee, Beijing). Following the determination of the growth curve, cells were centrifuged (5000 rpm, 4°C, 10 min) and collected, then washed and resuspended in 0.9% NaCl. They were stained for 15 min with the LIVE/DEAD BacLight Bacterial Viability Kits (Thermo Scientific, America) at room temperature, protected from light. Using a fluorescence microscope (Leica Inverted Fluorescence Microscope DMi1), the stained cells were observed: SYTO 9 dye emits green light at 500 nm under 480 nm excitation, and PI dye emits red light at 635 nm under 490 nm excitation. 5.10. NCM Reduction of Riboflavin Complete reduction of riboflavin was achieved using a 100 mL H‐type two‐chamber microbial fuel cell. The anodic chamber contained a riboflavin solution with a platinum net electrode, while the cathodic chamber contained a PB buffer, a platinum net electrode, and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. After purging with N2 for 30 min, riboflavin was reduced at −0.80 V under stirring, as confirmed by spectrophotometry. NCM reduction experiments were conducted under anoxic conditions at 25°C using riboflavin solutions. The experiments utilized 100 mL glass vials, which were shielded from light to prevent photochemical side reactions. The experimental solution was prepared by diluting NCM stock suspensions into the riboflavin solution to achieve a final NCM concentration of 0.2 g L−1, followed by a 1‐h reaction period under continuous stirring. Throughout the experiments, 0.9‐mL aliquots of the suspension were extracted from the reactors using plastic syringes. The reaction in these aliquots was promptly quenched by removing NCM particles through 0.22 µm syringe filtration, and the absorbance was rapidly measured within the 340 to 540 nm range. 5.11. Determination of Population of Bacteria The anaerobic bottles were incubated at 4°C for one hour. Subsequently, the culture medium was carefully decanted, and sterile saline was introduced into the anaerobic bottle. The mixture was vortexed to dissociate the cells. A serial dilution of the bacterial suspension was performed, and it was subsequently plated onto solid culture media to facilitate single colony enumeration. 5.12. Homologous Recombination and Construction of Mutant Strains Deletions of the genes mtrC and omcA in S. oneidensis were achieved via a two‐step homologous recombination strategy utilizing the suicide plasmid pHG1.0. To construct the recombinant deletion plasmids, the ∼500 bp upstream and ∼500 bp downstream flanking fragments of each target gene were amplified via PCR using S. oneidensis genomic DNA as the template. These upstream and downstream fragments were subsequently fused via overlap extension PCR and cloned into the restriction sites of the plasmid pHG1.0. The resulting constructs were transformed into E. coli WM3064, a diaminopimelic acid (DAP)‐auxotrophic donor strain cultured in LB medium supplemented with 0.3 mm DAP. Biparental conjugation was conducted by mixing the E. coli donor and S. oneidensis recipient cells on DAP‐supplemented LB agar. For the first‐step selection, single‐crossover transconjugants were isolated on nutrient agar containing 30 µg mL−1 gentamicin but lacking DAP to eliminate the donor cells. To initiate the second‐step crossover event, verified single‐crossover colonies were cultured in antibiotic‐free LB broth and subsequently plated onto LB agar supplemented with 10% (w/v) sucrose for sacB‐mediated counter‐selection. Sucrose‐resistant and gentamycin‐sensitive colonies were screened, and the successful mtrC‐ and omcA‐deleted mutants were verified via colony PCR and subsequent Sanger sequencing. The deletion of the genes mtrC and omcA was performed in the wild‐type strain S. oneidensis MR‐1, which was subsequently transformed with the plasmid pHG13‐Ptac‐ribADEHC‐irrE, resulting in the mutant strains SO3∆mtrC, SO3∆omcA, and SO3∆mtrC∆omcA. 5.13. Comet Assay for DNA Damage Bacterial cells in the mid‐logarithmic growth phase were subjected to exposure to 6 mg L−1 of Ni2+ and 3 mg L−1 of Co2+ for durations of 8 and 6 h for S. oneidensis and B. subtilis, respectively. 10 µL of the cell suspension was combined with 100 µL of a 0.5% low‐melting agarose (LMA) solution. Subsequently, 50 µL of this mixture was dispensed onto a Comet assay microscope slide (Beyotime, Shanghai) and evenly distributed within a well. Following solidification at 4°C, a layer of 0.5% lysozyme‐LMA was applied atop the gel and allowed to solidify. The prepared slide was then incubated for 30 min at 30°C for S. oneidensis and 37°C for B. subtilis. The slide underwent sequential immersion in a lysing solution (composed of 2.5 M NaCl, 100.0 mm EDTA, 10.0 mm Tris‐HCl, 1% sodium N‐lauryl sarcosine, 0.6% Triton X‐100, pH 10.0) for 1 h in darkness, followed by immersion in an enzyme digestion solution (comprised of 2.5 m NaCl, 10.0 mm EDTA, 10.0 mm Tris‐HCl, and 0.5 mg mL−1 proteinase K, pH 7.4) at 37°C for 2 h. Electrophoresis was conducted in an electrophoresis buffer (sodium acetate and Tris at pH 9.0) at 12 V for 30 min under chilled conditions. Subsequently, the slide was allowed to dry at room temperature in darkness and was stained with 50.0 mL of 1.0 mm YOYO‐1 in 5% DMSO. After air‐drying in the dark for 5 min, the stack of microgel was imaged with a fluorescence microscope (Ex/Em 491/509 nm). ImageJ was used to analyze the DNA tail lengths. 5.14. Fluorescence Assays on Intracellular ROS Intracellular ROS levels were measured using CM‐H2DCFDA (Beyotime, Shanghai). Bacterial cells were harvested by centrifugation (8000 rpm, 5 min), washed twice with sterile PBS, and resuspended to an optical density at OD600 of 0.5. The cells were then incubated with CM‐H2DCFDA at a final concentration of 10 µm in the dark at 30°C (S. oneidensis) or 37°C (B. subtilis) for 30 min. After probe loading, the cells were washed with sterile PBS to remove extracellular probe and resuspended in fresh PBS. For ROS induction, cells were treated with 6 mg L−1 of Ni2+ and 3 mg L−1 of Co2+ for 5 h. Untreated cells served as the negative control. Following treatment, the cells were transferred to a black 96‐well plate, and the fluorescence intensity was measured using a microplate reader (Ex/Em 495/530 nm). Fluorescence readings were normalized to the OD600 (cell density) of each sample. All measurements were performed in triplicate, and the relative ROS level was expressed as the change relative to the untreated control. 5.15. The Stepwise Precipitation Approach for Separation and Recovery of Metal Salts 0.2 mol L−1 dimethylglyoxime solution was first added to the leachate at a stoichiometric molar ratio of 2:1 (dimethylglyoxime: Ni) to selectively precipitate Ni as Ni(C4H6N2O2)2. From the resulting filtrate, Co was subsequently precipitated as CoC2O4, by introducing 0.5 mol L−1 oxalic acid solution at the molar ratio of 1.2:1 (oxalic acid: Co). Both isolated precipitates were filtered. Subsequently, Mn was extracted from the solution using 70% saponified D2EHPA with 20 mmol L−1 HCl at an aqueous‐to‐organic phase ratio of 0.5. The Mn‐loaded D2EHPA was stripped with 0.1 mol L−1 H2SO4 to obtain MnSO4. Finally, Li was recovered from the remaining aqueous phase as Li3PO4, by adding 0.5 mol L−1 H3PO4 solution at the molar ratio of 1.1:1 (H3PO4: Li). To determine the elemental composition, the purified metal salts were re‐dissolved in 4 m HCl and subsequently quantified by ICP‐OES. The recovery efficiency of each metal was determined by comparing the mass of the target metal in the recovered salts with that initially present in the leachate. The purity of each recovered metal salt was calculated as the mass ratio of the target metal to the total mass of the four major metals (Li, Ni, Co, and Mn) present in the product. Other elements, such as Cu and Fe, were not considered, as their concentrations were below the detection limit. Author Contributions
B.‐C.Z. and C.‐X.Q. designed the project, analysed data, and drafted the manuscript. B.‐C.Z., C.‐X.Q., H.‐C.L., Y.‐Y.W., Y.L, H.Y., J.‐Q.Z., C.L., D.‐G.W., Q.‐L.T., Z.‐W.W., D.‐N.Z., D.‐K.X., and F.L. performed experiments. H.S. supervised the project, designed experiments, analyzed data, and critically revised the manuscript. Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Supporting information
Supporting File: advs77699‐sup‐0001‐SuppMat.docx. Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development (2025YFA0921900), Liaoning Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (ZX20250327), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC 22378305), the Haihe Laboratory of Sustainable Chemical Transformations (24HHWCSS00004), and the Start‐Up Grant (mygccrc[2022]006). Data Availability Statement The data that support the findings of this study are available in the supporting information of this article. References 1.
Choi J. and Aurbach D., “Promise and Reality of Post‐Lithium‐Ion Batteries With High Energy Densities,” Nature Reviews Materials
1, no. 4 (2016): 16013, 10.1038/natrevmats.2016.13. 2.
Bauer C., Burkhardt S., Dasgupta N., et al., “Charging Sustainable Batteries,” Nature Sustainability
5, no. 3 (2022): 176–178, 10.1038/s41893-022-00864-1. 3.
Wang J., Ma J., Zhuang Z., et al., “Toward Direct Regeneration of Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries: A Next‐Generation Recycling Method,” Chemical Reviews
124, no. 5 (2024): 2839–2887, 10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00884.
 4.
Biswal B., Zhang B., Tran P., Zhang J., and Balasubramanian R., “Recycling of Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries for a Sustainable Future: Recent Advancements,” Chemical Society Reviews
53, no. 11 (2024): 5552–5592, 10.1039/d3cs00898c.
 5.
Lv H., Huang H., Huang C., Gao Q., Yang Z., and Zhang W., “Electric Field Driven De‐Lithiation: A Strategy Towards Comprehensive and Efficient Recycling of Electrode Materials From Spent Lithium Ion Batteries,” Applied Catalysis B: Environmental
283 (2021): 119634, 10.1016/j.apcatb.2020.119634. 6.
Kang D., Chen M., and Ogunseitan O., “Potential Environmental and Human Health Impacts of Rechargeable Lithium Batteries in Electronic Waste,” Environmental Science & Technology
47, no. 10 (2013): 5495–5503, 10.1021/es400614y.
 7.
Larcher D. and Tarascon J., “Towards Greener and More Sustainable Batteries for Electrical Energy Storage,” Nature Chemistry
7, no. 1 (2015): 19–29, 10.1038/nchem.2085. 8.
Wang J., Jia K., Ma J., et al., “Sustainable Upcycling of Spent LiCoO2 to an Ultra‐Stable Battery Cathode at High Voltage,” Nature Sustainability
6, no. 7 (2023): 797–805, 10.1038/s41893-023-01094-9. 9.
Harper G., Sommerville R., Kendrick E., et al., “Recycling Lithium‐Ion Batteries From Electric Vehicles,” Nature
575, no. 7781 (2019): 75–86, 10.1038/s41586-019-1682-5.
 10.
Yang T., Luo D., Zhang X., et al., “Sustainable Regeneration of Spent Cathodes for Lithium‐Ion and Post‐Lithium‐Ion Batteries,” Nature Sustainability
7, no. 6 (2024): 776–785, 10.1038/s41893-024-01351-5. 11.
Fan E., Li L., Wang Z., et al., “Sustainable Recycling Technology for Li‐Ion Batteries and Beyond: Challenges and Future Prospects,” Chemical Reviews
120, no. 14 (2020): 7020–7063, 10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00535.
 12.
Ma X., Meng Z., Bellonia M., et al., “The Evolution of Lithium‐Ion Battery Recycling,” Nature Reviews Clean Technology
1, no. 1 (2025): 75–94, 10.1038/s44359-024-00010-4. 13.
Li P., Luo S., Lin Y., et al., “Fundamentals of the Recycling of Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries,” Chemical Society Reviews
53, no. 24 (2024): 11967–12013, 10.1039/d4cs00362d.
 14.
Ju Z., Zheng T., Zhang B., et al., “Magnetically Oriented Nanosheet Interlayer for Dynamic Regeneration in Lithium Metal Batteries,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
121, no. 44 (2024): 2413739121, 10.1073/pnas.2413739121. 15.
Neumann J., Petranikova M., Meeus M., et al., “Recycling of Lithium‐Ion Batteries—Current State of the Art, Circular Economy, and Next Generation Recycling,” Advanced Energy Materials
12, no. 17 (2022): 2102917, 10.1002/aenm.202102917. 16.
Zhou M., Li B., Li J., and Xu Z., “Pyrometallurgical Technology in the Recycling of a Spent Lithium Ion Battery: Evolution and the Challenge,” ACS ES&T Engineering
1 (2021): 1369, 10.1021/acsestengg.1c00067. 17.
Holzer A., Wiszniewski L., Kern S., and Raupenstrauch H., “Optimization of a Pyrometallurgical Process to Efficiently Recover Valuable Metals From Commercially Used Lithium‐Ion Battery Cathode Materials LCO, NCA, NMC622, and LFP,” Metals
12 (2022): 1642, 10.3390/met12101642. 18.
Li Y., Lv W., Huang H., et al., “Recycling of Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries in View of Green Chemistry,” Green Chemistry
23, no. 17 (2021): 6139–6171, 10.1039/d1gc01639c. 19.
Srivastava V., Rantala V., Mehdipour P., et al., “A Comprehensive Review of the Reclamation of Resources From Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries,” Chemical Engineering Journal
474 (2023): 145822, 10.1016/j.cej.2023.145822. 20.
Roy J., Rarotra S., Krikstolaityte V., et al., “Green Recycling Methods to Treat Lithium‐Ion Batteries E‐Waste: A Circular Approach to Sustainability,” Advanced Materials
34, no. 25 (2022): 2103346, 10.1002/adma.202103346. 21.
Joulie M., Laucournet R., and Billy E., “Hydrometallurgical Process for the Recovery of High Value Metals From Spent Lithium Nickel Cobalt Aluminum Oxide Based Lithium‐Ion Batteries,” Journal of Power Sources
247 (2014): 551–555, 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.08.128. 22.
Chan K., Anawati J., Malik M., and Azimi G., “Closed‐Loop Recycling of Lithium, Cobalt, Nickel, and Manganese From Waste Lithium‐Ion Batteries of Electric Vehicles,” ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering
9, no. 12 (2021): 4398–4410, 10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c06869. 23.
Zeng X., Li J., and Shen B., “Novel Approach to Recover Cobalt and Lithium From Spent Lithium‐Ion Battery Using Oxalic Acid,” Journal of Hazardous Materials
295 (2015): 112–118, 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2015.02.064.
 24.
Choi J., Kim J., Kim S., and Yun Y., “Simple, Green Organic Acid‐Based Hydrometallurgy for Waste‐To‐Energy Storage Devices: Recovery of NiMnCoC2O4 as an Electrode Material for Pseudocapacitor From Spent LiNiMnCoO2 Batteries,” Journal of Hazardous Materials
424 (2022): 127481.
 25.
Fan E., Yang J., Huang Y., et al., “Leaching Mechanisms of Recycling Valuable Metals From Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries by a Malonic Acid‐Based Leaching System,” ACS Applied Energy Materials
3, no. 9 (2020): 8532–8542, 10.1021/acsaem.0c01166. 26.
Wang W., Han Y., Zhang T., Zhang L., and Xu S., “Alkali Metal Salt Catalyzed Carbothermic Reduction for Sustainable Recovery of LiCoO2: Accurately Controlled Reduction and Efficient Water Leaching,” ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering
7, no. 19 (2019): 16729–16737, 10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b04175. 27.
Yu J., Ma B., Qiu Z., Wang C., and Chen Y., “Separation and Recovery of Valuable Metals From Ammonia Leaching Solution of Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries,” ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering
11, no. 26 (2023): 9738–9750, 10.1021/acssuschemeng.3c01714. 28.
Cong J., Luo S., Sun Q., et al., “Study on Deep Synergistic Leaching Mechanism of Spent Lithium Iron Phosphate Under the H2SO4‐H2O2 System and Precise Chemical Precipitation Recovery Strategy of Lithium Carbonate,” Separation and Purification Technology
363 (2025): 132326, 10.1016/j.seppur.2025.132326. 29.
Wang W., Zhang Y., Liu X., and Xu S., “A Simplified Process for Recovery of Li and Co From Spent LiCoO2 Cathode Using Al Foil as the In Situ Reductant,” ACS Sustainable Chem Eng
7, no. 14 (2019): 12222, 10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b01564. 30.
Chen M., Ma X., Chen B., et al., “Recycling End‐of‐Life Electric Vehicle Lithium‐Ion Batteries,” Joule
3, no. 11 (2019): 2622–2646, 10.1016/j.joule.2019.09.014. 31.
Tran M., Rodrigues M., Kato K., Babu G., and Ajayan P., “Deep Eutectic Solvents for Cathode Recycling of Li‐Ion Batteries,” Nature Energy
4, no. 4 (2019): 339–345, 10.1038/s41560-019-0368-4. 32.
Li H., Berbille A., Zhao X., Wang Z., Tang W., and Wang Z., “A Contact‐Electro‐Catalytic Cathode Recycling Method for Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries,” Nature Energy
8, no. 10 (2023): 1137–1144, 10.1038/s41560-023-01348-y. 33.
Logan B. and Rabaey K., “Conversion of Wastes Into Bioelectricity and Chemicals by Using Microbial Electrochemical Technologies,” Science
337, no. 6095 (2012): 686–690, 10.1126/science.1217412.
 34.
Tebo B., Bargar J., Clement B., et al., “BIOGENIC MANGANESE OXIDES: Properties and Mechanisms of Formation,” Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences
32, no. 1 (2004): 287–328, 10.1146/annurev.earth.32.101802.120213. 35.
Ahmed M. and Lin L., “Ferric Reduction in Organic Matter Oxidation and its Applicability for Anaerobic Wastewater Treatment: A Review and Future Aspects,” Reviews in Environmental Science and Bio/Technology
16, no. 2 (2017): 273–287, 10.1007/S11157-017-9424-3. 36.
Pham A., Rose A., and Waite T., “Kinetics of Cu (II) Reduction by Natural Organic Matter,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry A
116, no. 25 (2012): 6590, 10.1021/jp300995h.
 37.
Cao J., Cui Z., Wang T., et al., “Reductive Removal of Cr (VI) by Citric Acid Promoted by Ceramsite Particles: Kinetics, Influential Factors, and Mechanisms,” Materials Today Communications
28 (2021): 102716, 10.1016/j.mtcomm.2021.102716. 38.
Jin X., Peldszus S., and Huck P., “Reaction Kinetics of Selected Micropollutants in Ozonation and Advanced Oxidation Processes,” Water Research
46, no. 19 (2012): 6519–6530, 10.1016/j.watres.2012.09.026.
 39.
Cheng M., Zeng G., Huang D., et al., “Hydroxyl Radicals Based Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) for Remediation of Soils Contaminated With Organic Compounds: A Review,” Chemical Engineering Journal
284 (2016): 582–598, 10.1016/j.cej.2015.09.001. 40.
Lv W., Wang Z., Cao H., Sun Y., Zhang Y., and Sun Z., “A Critical Review and Analysis on the Recycling of Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries,” ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering
6, no. 2 (2018): 1504–1521, 10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b03811. 41.
Braeken L., Bruggen B., and Vandecasteele C., “Regeneration of Brewery Waste Water Using Nanofiltration,” Water Research
38, no. 13 (2004): 3075–3082, 10.1016/j.watres.2004.03.028.
 42.
Romero S., Merino E., Bolivar F., Gosset G., and Martinez A., “Metabolic Engineering of Bacillus Subtilis for Ethanol Production: Lactate Dehydrogenase Plays a Key Role in Fermentative Metabolism,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology
73, no. 16 (2007): 5190, 10.1128/AEM.00625-07.
 43.
Yang Y., Ding Y., Hu Y., et al., “Enhancing Bidirectional Electron Transfer of Shewanella oneidensis by a Synthetic Flavin Pathway,” ACS Synthetic Biology
4, no. 7 (2015): 815–823, 10.1021/sb500331x.
 44.
Marsili E., Baron D., Shikhare I., Coursolle D., Gralnick J., and Bond D., “Shewanella Secretes Flavins That Mediate Extracellular Electron Transfer,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
105, no. 10 (2008): 3968–3973, 10.1073/pnas.0710525105. 45.
Wang G., Shi T., Chen T., et al., “Integrated Whole‐Genome and Transcriptome Sequence Analysis Reveals the Genetic Characteristics of a Riboflavin‐Overproducing Bacillus Subtilis,” Metabolic Engineering
48 (2018): 138–149, 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.05.022.
 46.
Hang M., Gunsolus I., Wayland H., et al., “Impact of Nanoscale Lithium Nickel Manganese Cobalt Oxide (NMC) on the Bacterium Shewanella Oneidensis MR‐1,” Chemistry of Materials
28, no. 4 (2016): 1092–1100, 10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b04505. 47.
Li M., Zhang D., Holmes D., et al., “Genetic and Transcriptomic Analysis of Microbial Electro‐Extraction for Releasing Metals From Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries,” Bioresource Technology
440 (2026): 133479, 10.1016/j.biortech.2025.133479.
 48.
Earl A., Mohundro M., Mian I., and Battista J., “The IrrE Protein of Deinococcus radiodurans R1 Is a Novel Regulator of recA Expression,” Journal of Bacteriology
184, no. 22 (2002): 6216–6224, 10.1128/jb.184.22.6216-6224.2002.
 49.
Karlsson H., Bucchianico S., Collins A., and Dusinska M., “Can the Comet Assay be Used Reliably to Detect Nanoparticle‐Induced Genotoxicity?,” Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis
56, no. 2 (2015): 82–96, 10.1002/em.21933.
 50.
Chen T., Wang J., Zeng L., et al., “Significant Rewiring of the Transcriptome and Proteome of an Escherichia coli Strain Harboring a Tailored Exogenous Global Regulator IrrE,” PLoS ONE
7, no. 7 (2012): 37126, 10.1371/journal.pone.0037126. 51.
Oparka M., Walczak J., Malinska D., et al., “Quantifying ROS Levels Using CM‐H2 DCFDA and HyPer,” Methods
109 (2016): 3–11, 10.1016/j.ymeth.2016.06.008.
 52.
Lin T., Ding W., Sun L., Wang L., Liu C., and Song H., “Engineered Shewanella Oneidensis‐Reduced Graphene Oxide Biohybrid With Enhanced Biosynthesis and Transport of Flavins Enabled a Highest Bioelectricity Output in Microbial Fuel Cells,” Nano Energy
50 (2018): 639–648, 10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.05.072. 53.
Lu C., Bucher G., and Sander W., “Photoinduced Interactions Between Oxidized and Reduced Lipoic Acid and Riboflavin (Vitamin B2),” Chemphyschem
5, no. 1 (2004): 47–56, 10.1002/cphc.200300687.
 54.
Coursolle D., Baron D., Bond D., and Gralnick J., “The Mtr Respiratory Pathway Is Essential for Reducing Flavins and Electrodes in Shewanella Oneidensis,” Journal of Bacteriology
192, no. 2 (2010): 467–474, 10.1128/JB.00925-09.
 55.
Kim K., Raymond D., Candeago R., and Su X., “Selective Cobalt and Nickel Electrodeposition for Lithium‐Ion Battery Recycling Through Integrated Electrolyte and Interface Control,” Nature Communications
12, no. 1 (2021): 6554, 10.1038/s41467-021-26814-7. 56.
Liang Z., Ding X., Cai C., et al., “Acetate Acid and Glucose Assisted Subcritical Reaction for Metal Recovery From Spent Lithium Ion Batteries,” Journal of Cleaner Production
369 (2022): 133281, 10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.133281. 57.
Kumar V., Mishra R., Kaur G., and Dutta D., “Cobalt and Nickel Impair DNA Metabolism by the Oxidative Stress Independent Pathway,” Metallomics
9, no. 11 (2017): 1596–1609, 10.1039/c7mt00231a.
 58.
Shi H., Mao X., Yang F., et al., “Multi‐Scale Analysis of Acidophilic Microbial Consortium Biofilm's Tolerance of Lithium and Cobalt Ions in Bioleaching,” Journal of Hazardous Materials
474 (2024): 134764, 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.134764.
 59.
Li C., Dai G., Liu R., et al., “Separation and Recovery of Nickel Cobalt Manganese Lithium From Waste Ternary Lithium‐Ion Batteries,” Separation and Purification Technology
306 (2023): 122559, 10.1016/j.seppur.2022.122559. 60.
Liu T., Chen J., Shen X., and Li H., “Regulating and Regenerating the Valuable Metals From the Cathode Materials in Lithium‐Ion Batteries by Nickel‐Cobalt‐Manganese Co‐Extraction,” Separation and Purification Technology
259 (2021): 118088, 10.1016/j.seppur.2020.118088. 61.
Gao W., Song J., Cao H., et al., “Selective Recovery of Valuable Metals From Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries—Process Development and Kinetics Evaluation,” Journal of Cleaner Production
178 (2018): 833–845, 10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.040. 62.
Chen X., Fan B., Xu L., Zhou T., and Kong J., “An Atom‐Economic Process for the Recovery of High Value‐Added Metals From Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries,” Journal of Cleaner Production
112 (2016): 3562–3570, 10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.10.132. 63.
Xin Y., Guo X., Chen S., Wang J., Wu F., and Xin B., “Bioleaching of Valuable Metals Li, Co, Ni and Mn From Spent Electric Vehicle Li‐Ion Batteries for the Purpose of Recovery,” Journal of Cleaner Production
116 (2016): 249–258, 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.01.001. 64.
Mandl M., Lerchbammer R., and Gerold E., “Bioleaching of Lithium‐Ion Battery Black Mass: A Comparative Study on Gluconobacter Oxydans and Acidithiobacillus Thiooxidans,” Metals
15 (2025): 1112, 10.3390/met15101112. 65.
Ranganathan D., Roy J., Cao B., and Srinivasan M., “Facile Oxidative Recovery of Manganese as Electrochemically Active MnO2 From Spent Lithium‐Ion Battery Bioleachate,” ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering
12, no. 28 (2024): 10475–10485, 10.1021/acssuschemeng.4c02595. 66.
Horeh N., Mousavi S., and Shojaosadati S., “Bioleaching of Valuable Metals From Spent Lithium‐Ion Mobile Phone Batteries Using Aspergillus Niger,” Journal of Power Sources
320 (2016): 257–266, 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.04.104. 67.
Horeh N. and Mousavi S., “Enhanced Recovery of Valuable Metals From Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries Through Optimization of Organic Acids Produced by Aspergillus Niger,” Waste Management
60 (2017): 666–679, 10.1016/j.wasman.2016.10.034.
 68.
Yang Y., Lei S., Song S., Sun W., Wang L., and Manage W., “Stepwise Recycling of Valuable Metals From Ni‐Rich Cathode Material of Spent Lithium‐Ion Battery,” Waste Management
102 (2020): 131–138, 10.1016/j.wasman.2019.09.044.
 69.
Su F., Zhou X., Liu X., et al., “Efficient Recovery of Valuable Metals From Spent Lithium‐Ion Batteries by Pyrite Method With Hydrometallurgy Process,” Chemical Engineering Journal
455 (2023): 140914, 10.1016/j.cej.2022.140914. 70.
Jung J., Sui P., and Zhang J., “A Review of Recycling Spent Lithium‐Ion Battery Cathode Materials Using Hydrometallurgical Treatments,” Journal of Energy Storage
35 (2021): 102217, 10.1016/j.est.2020.102217. Associated Data Supplementary Materials
Supporting File: advs77699‐sup‐0001‐SuppMat.docx. Data Availability Statement The data that support the findings of this study are available in the supporting information of this article.
