1. mSystems. 2022 Dec 20;7(6):e0041722. doi: 10.1128/msystems.00417-22. Epub 2022
 Oct 27.

Quantitative Stable-Isotope Probing (qSIP) with Metagenomics Links Microbial 
Physiology and Activity to Soil Moisture in Mediterranean-Climate Grassland 
Ecosystems.

Greenlon A(1), Sieradzki E(1), Zablocki O(2)(3), Koch BJ(4)(5), Foley MM(4)(5), 
Kimbrel JA(6), Hungate BA(4)(5), Blazewicz SJ(6), Nuccio EE(6), Sun CL(2)(3), 
Chew A(1), Mancilla CJ(1), Sullivan MB(2)(3)(7), Firestone M(1), Pett-Ridge 
J(6)(8), Banfield JF(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Policy and Management, University 
California, Berkeley, Berkley, California, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(3)Center of Microbiome Science, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(4)Center for Ecosystem Science and Society, Northern Arizona 
Universitygrid.261120.6, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona Universitygrid.261120.6, 
Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
(6)Physical and Life Sciences Directorate, Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratorygrid.250008.f, Livermore, California, USA.
(7)Department of Civil, Environmental and Geodetic Engineering, Ohio State 
University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(8)Life & Environmental Sciences Department, University of California, Merced, 
Merced, California, USA.
(9)Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, 
Berkeleygrid.47840.3f, Berkley, California, USA.

The growth and physiology of soil microorganisms, which play vital roles in 
biogeochemical cycling, are shaped by both current and historical soil 
environmental conditions. Here, we developed and applied a genome-resolved 
metagenomic implementation of quantitative stable isotope probing (qSIP) with an 
H218O labeling experiment to identify actively growing soil microorganisms and 
their genomic capacities. qSIP enabled measurement of taxon-specific growth 
because isotopic incorporation into microbial DNA requires production of new 
genome copies. We studied three Mediterranean grassland soils across a rainfall 
gradient to evaluate the hypothesis that historic precipitation levels are an 
important factor controlling trait selection. We used qSIP-informed 
genome-resolved metagenomics to resolve the active subset of soil community 
members and identify their characteristic ecophysiological traits. Higher 
year-round precipitation levels correlated with higher activity and growth rates 
of flagellar motile microorganisms. In addition to heavily isotopically labeled 
bacteria, we identified abundant isotope-labeled phages, suggesting 
phage-induced cell lysis likely contributed to necromass production at all three 
sites. Further, there was a positive correlation between phage activity and the 
activity of putative phage hosts. Contrary to our expectations, the capacity to 
decompose the diverse complex carbohydrates common in soil organic matter or 
oxidize methanol and carbon monoxide were broadly distributed across active and 
inactive bacteria in all three soils, implying that these traits are not highly 
selected for by historical precipitation. IMPORTANCE Soil moisture is a critical 
factor that strongly shapes the lifestyle of soil organisms by changing access 
to nutrients, controlling oxygen diffusion, and regulating the potential for 
mobility. We identified active microorganisms in three grassland soils with 
similar mineral contexts, yet different historic rainfall inputs, by adding 
water labeled with a stable isotope and tracking that isotope in DNA of growing 
microbes. By examining the genomes of active and inactive microorganisms, we 
identified functions that are enriched in growing organisms, and showed that 
different functions were selected for in different soils. Wetter soil had higher 
activity of motile organisms, but activity of pathways for degradation of soil 
organic carbon compounds, including simple carbon substrates, were comparable 
for all three soils. We identified many labeled, and thus active bacteriophages 
(viruses that infect bacteria), implying that the cells they killed contributed 
to soil organic matter. The activity of these bacteriophages was significantly 
correlated with activity of their hosts.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.00417-22
PMCID: PMC9765451
PMID: 36300946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.