1. Curr Microbiol. 2026 Jun 6;83(7):403. doi: 10.1007/s00284-026-05004-y.

Boosted Biomass Production of Single and Co-Cultures of Microalgae Grown in Whey
Supplemented Media: a Sustainable Approach.

Kelarijani ZE(1), Mousavi ZE(2), Kiani H(3)(4), Razavi SH(1), Halim R(5).

Author information:
(1)Bioprocessing and Biodetection Lab, Department of Food Science and
Technology, University of Tehran, Karaj, Iran.
(2)Bioprocessing and Biodetection Lab, Department of Food Science and
Technology, University of Tehran, Karaj, Iran. zeinab.mosavi@ut.ac.ir.
(3)Bioprocessing and Biodetection Lab, Department of Food Science and
Technology, University of Tehran, Karaj, Iran. hokiani@ut.ac.ir.
(4)School of Biosystems and Food Engineering, University College Dublin,
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. hokiani@ut.ac.ir.
(5)School of Biosystems and Food Engineering, University College Dublin,
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

Whey is a major by-product of the dairy industry characterized by its high
nitrogenous loads and organic content, presenting significant environmental
challenges, if it is not valorized properly. This study investigates the
potential of microalgae single and co-cultures as a sustainable approach for
whey valorisation and valuable biomass production. Different combinations of
four-species-comprising Scenedesmus sp. (SC), Tetradesmus obliquus (TO),
Chlorella vulgaris Beijerinck (CVB), and Chlorella vulgaris CCAP 211/19
(CV)-were cultivated in casein whey-based media to assess cell proliferation and
biomass yield. Nitrogen assimilation was also investigated during this study.
Results revealed that TO achieved the highest biomass yield (1.3 g/L) in whey
medium, while the co-culture of Chlorella vulgaris strains exhibited synergistic
growth, outperforming single cultures and the mixed culture of all four species
(MIX). Flow cytometry showed that the pattern of the cell population of algae
for whey containing media was different from those for standard medium (BBM),
the cells were larger with reduced chlorophyll content. The highest cell counts
were related to TO and the consortium culture (MIX). This observation could be
linked to the results obtained by biomass weight, which showed that TO had the
highest biomass weight, as this microalgae exhibited larger cells sizes and cell
counts. Interestingly, nitrogen assimilation studies demonstrated that
co-cultures of microalgae enhanced nitrate and ammonia removal, significantly.
The removal performance was particularly improved in whey-supplemented media,
underscoring the potential of co-cultures for efficient and sustainable nitrogen
removal. Up to 99% of protein and 90% of nitrate could be successfully removed
from whey solution after three weeks. This research emphasizes the dual benefits
of microalgae co-cultures in nitrogen removal and simultaneously high-value
biomass production using media based on whey. The results of nitrogen
assimilation using co-cultures offered an improved sustainable solution to
nitrogen removal problem in the food industry. The findings provide a foundation
for precision consortium design in dairy waste valorization, paving the way for
cost-effective and environmentally friendly solutions in the dairy industry.

© 2026. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-026-05004-y
PMID: 42249951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors
declare no competing interests.