1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 24;9(7):e102458. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102458. 
eCollection 2014.

The expanded diversity of methylophilaceae from Lake Washington through 
cultivation and genomic sequencing of novel ecotypes.

Beck DA(1), McTaggart TL(2), Setboonsarng U(2), Vorobev A(2), Kalyuzhnaya MG(3), 
Ivanova N(4), Goodwin L(5), Woyke T(4), Lidstrom ME(6), Chistoserdova L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, United States of America; eScience Institute, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, United States of America.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
United States of America.
(4)DOE Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, California, United States of 
America.
(5)Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico, United States of 
America.
(6)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, United States of America; Department of Microbiology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

We describe five novel Methylophilaceae ecotypes from a single ecological niche 
in Lake Washington, USA, and compare them to three previously described 
ecotypes, in terms of their phenotype and genome sequence divergence. Two of the 
ecotypes appear to represent novel genera within the Methylophilaceae. 
Genome-based metabolic reconstruction highlights metabolic versatility of 
Methylophilaceae with respect to methylotrophy and nitrogen metabolism, 
different ecotypes possessing different combinations of primary substrate 
oxidation systems (MxaFI-type methanol dehydrogenase versus XoxF-type methanol 
dehydrogenase; methylamine dehydrogenase versus N-methylglutamate pathway) and 
different potentials for denitrification (assimilatory versus respiratory 
nitrate reduction). By comparing pairs of closely related genomes, we uncover 
that site-specific recombination is the main means of genomic evolution and 
strain divergence, including lateral transfers of genes from both closely- and 
distantly related taxa. The new ecotypes and the new genomes contribute 
significantly to our understanding of the extent of genomic and metabolic 
diversity among organisms of the same family inhabiting the same ecological 
niche. These organisms also provide novel experimental models for studying the 
complexity and the function of the microbial communities active in 
methylotrophy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102458
PMCID: PMC4109929
PMID: 25058595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.