1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25299. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025299. Epub 2011 Sep
23.

pH landscapes in a novel five-species model of early dental biofilm.

Schlafer S(1), Raarup MK, Meyer RL, Sutherland DS, Dige I, Nyengaard JR, Nyvad 
B.

Author information:
(1)iNANO The Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center, Faculty of Science, Aarhus 
University, Aarhus, Denmark. sebastian.schlafer@hotmail.de

BACKGROUND: Despite continued preventive efforts, dental caries remains the most 
common disease of man. Organic acids produced by microorganisms in dental plaque 
play a crucial role for the development of carious lesions. During early stages 
of the pathogenetic process, repeated pH drops induce changes in microbial 
composition and favour the establishment of an increasingly acidogenic and 
aciduric microflora. The complex structure of dental biofilms, allowing for a 
multitude of different ecological environments in close proximity, remains 
largely unexplored. In this study, we designed a laboratory biofilm model that 
mimics the bacterial community present during early acidogenic stages of the 
caries process. We then performed a time-resolved microscopic analysis of the 
extracellular pH landscape at the interface between bacterial biofilm and 
underlying substrate.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Strains of Streptococcus oralis, Streptococcus 
sanguinis, Streptococcus mitis, Streptococcus downei and Actinomyces naeslundii 
were employed in the model. Biofilms were grown in flow channels that allowed 
for direct microscopic analysis of the biofilms in situ. The architecture and 
composition of the biofilms were analysed using fluorescence in situ 
hybridization and confocal laser scanning microscopy. Both biofilm structure and 
composition were highly reproducible and showed similarity to in-vivo-grown 
dental plaque. We employed the pH-sensitive ratiometric probe C-SNARF-4 to 
perform real-time microscopic analyses of the biofilm pH in response to salivary 
solutions containing glucose. Anaerobic glycolysis in the model biofilms created 
a mildly acidic environment. Decrease in pH in different areas of the biofilms 
varied, and distinct extracellular pH-microenvironments were conserved over 
several hours.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The designed biofilm model represents a promising tool 
to determine the effect of potential therapeutic agents on biofilm growth, 
composition and extracellular pH. Ratiometric pH analysis using C-SNARF-4 gives 
detailed insight into the pH landscape of living biofilms and contributes to our 
general understanding of metabolic processes in in-vivo-grown bacterial 
biofilms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025299
PMCID: PMC3179500
PMID: 21966490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.