1. Infect Immun. 2014 May;82(5):1968-81. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00087-14. Epub 2014 Feb
 24.

Symbiotic relationship between Streptococcus mutans and Candida albicans 
synergizes virulence of plaque biofilms in vivo.

Falsetta ML(1), Klein MI, Colonne PM, Scott-Anne K, Gregoire S, Pai CH, 
Gonzalez-Begne M, Watson G, Krysan DJ, Bowen WH, Koo H.

Author information:
(1)Center for Oral Biology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, 
New York, USA.

Streptococcus mutans is often cited as the main bacterial pathogen in dental 
caries, particularly in early-childhood caries (ECC). S. mutans may not act 
alone; Candida albicans cells are frequently detected along with heavy infection 
by S. mutans in plaque biofilms from ECC-affected children. It remains to be 
elucidated whether this association is involved in the enhancement of biofilm 
virulence. We showed that the ability of these organisms together to form 
biofilms is enhanced in vitro and in vivo. The presence of C. albicans augments 
the production of exopolysaccharides (EPS), such that cospecies biofilms accrue 
more biomass and harbor more viable S. mutans cells than single-species 
biofilms. The resulting 3-dimensional biofilm architecture displays sizeable S. 
mutans microcolonies surrounded by fungal cells, which are enmeshed in a dense 
EPS-rich matrix. Using a rodent model, we explored the implications of this 
cross-kingdom interaction for the pathogenesis of dental caries. Coinfected 
animals displayed higher levels of infection and microbial carriage within 
plaque biofilms than animals infected with either species alone. Furthermore, 
coinfection synergistically enhanced biofilm virulence, leading to aggressive 
onset of the disease with rampant carious lesions. Our in vitro data also 
revealed that glucosyltransferase-derived EPS is a key mediator of cospecies 
biofilm development and that coexistence with C. albicans induces the expression 
of virulence genes in S. mutans (e.g., gtfB, fabM). We also found that 
Candida-derived β1,3-glucans contribute to the EPS matrix structure, while 
fungal mannan and β-glucan provide sites for GtfB binding and activity. 
Altogether, we demonstrate a novel mutualistic bacterium-fungus relationship 
that occurs at a clinically relevant site to amplify the severity of a 
ubiquitous infectious disease.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00087-14
PMCID: PMC3993459
PMID: 24566629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]