1. Sci Total Environ. 2022 Mar 15;812:151468. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151468.  Epub 2021 Nov 4.

Common mechanisms cannot explain time- and dose-dependent DNA methylation 
changes in earthworms exposed to cadmium.

Aigner GP(1), Pittl V(1), Fiechtner B(1), Egger B(1), Šrut M(1), Höckner M(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Innsbruck, Institute of Zoology, Center for Molecular 
Biosciences Innsbruck, Technikerstraße 25, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)University of Innsbruck, Institute of Zoology, Center for Molecular 
Biosciences Innsbruck, Technikerstraße 25, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria. Electronic 
address: martina.hoeckner@uibk.ac.at.

DNA hypermethylation caused by environmental pollutants like cadmium (Cd) has 
already been demonstrated in many invertebrates, including earthworms. However, 
the exact epigenetic mechanisms that drive this hypermethylation are largely 
unknown and even basic DNA methylation and demethylation processes are hardly 
characterized. Therefore, we used an important bioindicator, the earthworm 
Lumbricus terrestris, as a model organism to determine time- and dose-dependent 
effects of Cd on global and gene-specific DNA methylation and its underlying 
mechanisms. We revealed Cd-induced adenine and cytosine hypermethylation using 
specific antibodies in dot blots and found that the methylation level of adenine 
compared to cytosine changed even to a bigger extent. However, the levels of 
hydroxymethylated cytosine did not differ between treatment groups. General 
methylation and demethylation components like methyltransferases (DNMT1 and 3), 
and ten-eleven translocation (TET) genes were confirmed in L. terrestris by 
quantitative RealTime PCR. However, neither gene expression, nor DNMT and TET 
enzyme activity showed significant differences in the Cd exposure groups. Using 
bisulfite conversion and sequencing, gene body methylation (gbm) of 
metallothionein 2 (MT2), one of the most important detoxification proteins, was 
characterized. Cd-dependent changes in MT2 gbm could, however, not be correlated 
to MT2 gene activity evaluated by quantitative RealTime PCR. Future directions 
as well as missing links are discussed in the present study hinting towards the 
importance of studying epigenetic marks and mechanistic insights in a broad 
variety of species to deepen our knowledge on the effects of changing 
environmental conditions.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151468
PMID: 34742794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.