1. mSphere. 2025 Sep 30;10(9):e0015925. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00159-25. Epub 2025 
Aug 25.

Synthetic communities of maize root bacteria interact and redirect benzoxazinoid 
metabolization.

Thoenen L(1)(2), Pestalozzi C(2), Zuest T(1)(3), Kreuzer M(4), Mateo P(1), 
Karasawa M(2), Deslandes G(1), Robert CA(1), Bruggmann R(4), Erb M(1), Schlaeppi 
K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Sciences, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Environmental Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Systematic and Evolutionary Botany, University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Interfaculty Bioinformatics Unit, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

Plant roots are colonized by diverse microbial communities. These communities 
are shaped by root exudates, including plant-specialized metabolites. 
Benzoxazinoids are such secreted compounds of maize. Individual microbes differ 
in their ability to tolerate and metabolize antimicrobial benzoxazinoids. To 
investigate how these traits combine in a community, we designed two synthetic 
communities of maize root bacteria that share six common strains and differ in 
their ability to metabolize benzoxazinoids based on the seventh strain. We 
exposed both communities to the benzoxazinoid MBOA 
(6-methoxybenzoxazolin-2(3H)-one) in vitro and found that the metabolizing 
community did not degrade MBOA to its aminophenoxazinone, as observed for 
individual strains, but, as a community, they formed the corresponding 
acetamide. MBOA shaped the differential compositions of both communities and 
increased the fraction of MBOA-tolerant strains. The benzoxazinoid-metabolizing 
community showed a higher tolerance to MBOA and was able to utilize MBOA as 
their sole carbon source for growth. Hence, bacterial interaction results in 
alternative benzoxazinoid metabolization and increases community performance in 
the presence of these antimicrobial compounds. Future work is needed to uncover 
the genetics of this metabolic interaction and ecological consequences for the 
bacterial community and the host plant.IMPORTANCEWe investigated how maize root 
bacteria-alone or in community-tolerate and metabolize antimicrobial compounds 
of their host plant. We found that the capacity to metabolize such a compound 
impacts bacterial community size and structure and, most importantly, benefits 
community fitness. We also found that interacting bacteria redirected the 
metabolization of the antimicrobial compound to an alternative degradation 
pathway. Our work highlights the need to study the teamwork of microbes to 
uncover their community traits to ultimately understand the ecological 
consequences for the bacterial community and eventually the host plant.

DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00159-25
PMCID: PMC12483121
PMID: 40853002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.