1. PLoS One. 2020 Mar 4;15(3):e0229537. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229537. 
eCollection 2020.

Combined analysis of microbial metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing 
data to assess in situ physiological conditions in the premature infant gut.

Sher Y(1), Olm MR(2), Raveh-Sadka T(2), Brown CT(2), Sher R(3), Firek B(4), 
Baker R(5), Morowitz MJ(4)(5), Banfield JF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management, University of 
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(3)Enview, Inc., San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(4)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(5)Magee-Womens Hospital of UPMC, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of 
America.

Microbes alter their transcriptomic profiles in response to the environment. The 
physiological conditions experienced by a microbial community can thus be 
inferred using meta-transcriptomic sequencing by comparing transcription levels 
of specifically chosen genes. However, this analysis requires accurate reference 
genomes to identify the specific genes from which RNA reads originate. In 
addition, such an analysis should avoid biases in transcript counts related to 
differences in organism abundance. In this study we describe an approach to 
address these difficulties. Sample-specific meta-genomic assembled genomes 
(MAGs) were used as reference genomes to accurately identify the origin of RNA 
reads, and transcript ratios of genes with opposite transcription responses were 
compared to eliminate biases related to differences in organismal abundance, an 
approach hereafter named the "diametric ratio" method. We used this approach to 
probe the environmental conditions experienced by Escherichia spp. in the gut of 
4 premature infants, 2 of whom developed necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), a 
severe inflammatory intestinal disease. We analyzed twenty fecal samples taken 
from four premature infants (4-6 time points from each infant), and found 
significantly higher diametric ratios of genes associated with low oxygen levels 
in samples of infants later diagnosed with NEC than in samples without NEC. We 
also show this method can be used for examining other physiological conditions, 
such as exposure to nitric oxide and osmotic pressure. These study results 
should be treated with caution, due to the presence of confounding factors that 
might also distinguish between NEC and control infants. Nevertheless, together 
with benchmarking analyses, we show here that the diametric ratio approach can 
be applied for evaluating the physiological conditions experienced by microbes 
in situ. Results from similar studies can be further applied for designing 
diagnostic methods to detect NEC in its early developmental stages.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229537
PMCID: PMC7055874
PMID: 32130257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RS affiliation to Enview, inc., does not alter 
our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.