1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Aug;80(15):4599-605. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00895-14.

Direct interspecies electron transfer between Geobacter metallireducens and 
Methanosarcina barkeri.

Rotaru AE, Shrestha PM, Liu F, Markovaite B, Chen S, Nevin KP, Lovley DR.

Direct interspecies electron transfer (DIET) is potentially an effective form of 
syntrophy in methanogenic communities, but little is known about the diversity 
of methanogens capable of DIET. The ability of Methanosarcina barkeri to 
participate in DIET was evaluated in coculture with Geobacter metallireducens. 
Cocultures formed aggregates that shared electrons via DIET during the 
stoichiometric conversion of ethanol to methane. Cocultures could not be 
initiated with a pilin-deficient G. metallireducens strain, suggesting that 
long-range electron transfer along pili was important for DIET. Amendments of 
granular activated carbon permitted the pilin-deficient G. metallireducens 
isolates to share electrons with M. barkeri, demonstrating that this conductive 
material could substitute for pili in promoting DIET. When M. barkeri was grown 
in coculture with the H2-producing Pelobacter carbinolicus, incapable of DIET, 
M. barkeri utilized H2 as an electron donor but metabolized little of the 
acetate that P.carbinolicus produced. This suggested that H2, but not electrons 
derived from DIET, inhibited acetate metabolism. P. carbinolicus-M. barkeri 
cocultures did not aggregate, demonstrating that, unlike DIET, close physical 
contact was not necessary for interspecies H2 transfer. M. barkeri is the second 
methanogen found to accept electrons via DIET and the first methanogen known to 
be capable of using either H2 or electrons derived from DIET for CO2 reduction. 
Furthermore, M. barkeri is genetically tractable,making it a model organism for 
elucidating mechanisms by which methanogens make biological electrical 
connections with other cells.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00895-14
PMCID: PMC4148795
PMID: 24837373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]