1. Genome Biol. 2013 Nov 22;14(11):R127. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-11-r127.

Genomic analysis reveals key aspects of prokaryotic symbiosis in the 
phototrophic consortium "Chlorochromatium aggregatum".

Liu Z, Müller J, Li T, Alvey RM, Vogl K, Frigaard NU, Rockwell NC, Boyd ES, 
Tomsho LP, Schuster SC, Henke P, Rohde M, Overmann J, Bryant DA.

BACKGROUND: 'Chlorochromatium aggregatum' is a phototrophic consortium, a 
symbiosis that may represent the highest degree of mutual interdependence 
between two unrelated bacteria not associated with a eukaryotic host. 
'Chlorochromatium aggregatum' is a motile, barrel-shaped aggregate formed from a 
single cell of 'Candidatus Symbiobacter mobilis", a polarly flagellated, 
non-pigmented, heterotrophic bacterium, which is surrounded by approximately 15 
epibiont cells of Chlorobium chlorochromatii, a non-motile photolithoautotrophic 
green sulfur bacterium.
RESULTS: We analyzed the complete genome sequences of both organisms to 
understand the basis for this symbiosis. Chl. chlorochromatii has acquired 
relatively few symbiosis-specific genes; most acquired genes are predicted to 
modify the cell wall or function in cell-cell adhesion. In striking contrast, 
'Ca. S. mobilis' appears to have undergone massive gene loss, is probably no 
longer capable of independent growth, and thus may only reproduce when consortia 
divide. A detailed model for the energetic and metabolic bases of the dependency 
of 'Ca. S. mobilis' on Chl. chlorochromatii is described.
CONCLUSIONS: Genomic analyses suggest that three types of interactions lead to a 
highly sophisticated relationship between these two organisms. Firstly, 
extensive metabolic exchange, involving carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur sources as 
well as vitamins, occurs from the epibiont to the central bacterium. Secondly, 
'Ca. S. mobilis' can sense and move towards light and sulfide, resources that 
only directly benefit the epibiont. Thirdly, electron cycling mechanisms, 
particularly those mediated by quinones and potentially involving shared 
protonmotive force, could provide an important basis for energy exchange in this 
and other symbiotic relationships.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-11-r127
PMCID: PMC4053972
PMID: 24267588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]