1. J Hazard Mater. 2023 Apr 5;447:130774. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2023.130774.
Epub  2023 Jan 10.

Genome-resolved metagenomics reveals depth-related patterns of microbial 
community structure and functions in a highly stratified, AMD overlaying mine 
tailings.

Luo ZH(1), Li Q(1), Chen N(1), Tang LY(1), Liao B(1), Yang TT(2), Huang LN(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Heavy Metal Mine Ecological Restoration Engineering Technology 
Research Center, Shaoguan, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: eseshln@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Acid mine drainage (AMD) is a worldwide environmental problem, yet 
bioremediation is hampered by a limited knowledge of the reductive microbial 
processes in the AMD ecosystem. Here, we generate extensive metagenome and 
geochemical datasets to investigate how microbial populations and metabolic 
capacities driving major element cycles are structured in a highly stratified, 
AMD overlaying tailings environment. The results demonstrated an explicit 
depth-dependent differentiation of microbial community composition and function 
profiles between the surface and deeper tailings layers, paralleling the 
dramatic shifts in major physical and geochemical properties. Specifically, key 
genes involved in sulfur and iron oxidation were significantly enriched in the 
surface tailings, whereas those associated with reductive nitrogen, sulfur, and 
iron processes were enriched in the deeper layers. Genome-resolved metagenomics 
retrieved 406 intermediate or high-quality genomes spanning 26 phyla, including 
major new groups (e.g., Patescibacteria and DPANN). Metabolic models involving 
nitrogen, sulfur, iron, and carbon cycles were proposed based on the functional 
potentials of the abundant microbial genomes, emphasizing syntrophy and the 
importance of lesser-known taxa in the degradation of complex carbon compounds. 
These results have implications for in situ AMD bioremediation.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2023.130774
PMID: 36641850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.