1. PeerJ. 2015 Feb 24;3:e801. doi: 10.7717/peerj.801. eCollection 2015.

Oxygen availability is a major factor in determining the composition of 
microbial communities involved in methane oxidation.

Hernandez ME(1), Beck DA(2), Lidstrom ME(3), Chistoserdova L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington , Seattle , USA 
; Biotechnological Management of Resources Network, Institute of Ecology , A.C. 
Xalapa, Veracruz , Mexico.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington , Seattle , USA 
; eScience Institute, University of Washington , Seattle , USA.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington , Seattle , USA 
; Department of Microbiology, University of Washington , Seattle , USA.
(4)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington , Seattle , USA.

We have previously observed that methane supplied to lake sediment microbial 
communities as a substrate not only causes a response by bona fide 
methanotrophic bacteria, but also by non-methane-oxidizing bacteria, especially 
by members of the family Methylophilaceae. This result suggested that methane 
oxidation in this environment likely involves communities composed of different 
functional guilds, rather than a single type of microbe. To obtain further 
support for this concept and to obtain further insights into the factors that 
may define such partnerships, we carried out microcosm incubations with sediment 
samples from Lake Washington at five different oxygen tensions, while methane 
was supplied at the same concentration in each. Community composition was 
determined through 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing after 10 and 16 weeks of 
incubation. We demonstrate that, in support of our prior observations, the 
methane-consuming communities were represented by two major types: the 
methanotrophs of the family Methylococcaceae and by non-methanotrophic 
methylotrophs of the family Methylophilaceae. However, different species 
persisted under different oxygen tensions. At high initial oxygen tensions (150 
to 225 µM) the major players were, respectively, species of the genera 
Methylosarcina and Methylophilus, while at low initial oxygen tensions (15 to 75 
µM) the major players were Methylobacter and Methylotenera. These data suggest 
that oxygen availability is at least one major factor determining specific 
partnerships in methane oxidation. The data also suggest that speciation within 
Methylococcaceae and Methylophilaceae may be driven by niche adaptation tailored 
toward specific placements within the oxygen gradient.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.801
PMCID: PMC4349146
PMID: 25755930

Conflict of interest statement: Ludmila Chistoserdova is an Academic Editor for 
Peer J.