1. FEMS Yeast Res. 2018 Dec 1;18(8). doi: 10.1093/femsyr/foy075.

Fermentation of glucose-xylose-arabinose mixtures by a synthetic consortium of 
single-sugar-fermenting Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains.

Verhoeven MD(1), de Valk SC(1), Daran JG(1), van Maris AJA(1), Pronk JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, Van der Maasweg 
9, 2629 HZ Delft, The Netherlands.

d-Glucose, d-xylose and l-arabinose are major sugars in lignocellulosic 
hydrolysates. This study explores fermentation of glucose-xylose-arabinose 
mixtures by a consortium of three 'specialist' Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains. 
A d-glucose- and l-arabinose-tolerant xylose specialist was constructed by 
eliminating hexose phosphorylation in an engineered xylose-fermenting strain and 
subsequent laboratory evolution. A resulting strain anaerobically grew and 
fermented d-xylose in the presence of 20 g L-1 of d-glucose and l-arabinose. A 
synthetic consortium that additionally comprised a similarly obtained arabinose 
specialist and a pentose non-fermenting laboratory strain, rapidly and 
simultaneously converted d-glucose and l-arabinose in anaerobic batch cultures 
on three-sugar mixtures. However, performance of the xylose specialist was 
strongly impaired in these mixed cultures. After prolonged cultivation of the 
consortium on three-sugar mixtures, the time required for complete sugar 
conversion approached that of a previously constructed and evolved 'generalist' 
strain. In contrast to the generalist strain, whose fermentation kinetics 
deteriorated during prolonged repeated-batch cultivation on a mixture of 20 g 
L-1d-glucose, 10 g L-1d-xylose and 5 g L-1l-arabinose, the evolved consortium 
showed stable fermentation kinetics. Understanding the interactions between 
specialist strains is a key challenge in further exploring the applicability of 
this synthetic consortium approach for industrial fermentation of 
lignocellulosic hydrolysates.

DOI: 10.1093/femsyr/foy075
PMID: 30010916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]