1. Microbiome. 2024 Jan 26;12(1):15. doi: 10.1186/s40168-023-01704-w.

Autotrophic biofilms sustained by deeply sourced groundwater host diverse 
bacteria implicated in sulfur and hydrogen metabolism.

Valentin-Alvarado LE(1)(2), Fakra SC(3), Probst AJ(4)(5), Giska JR(4)(6), Jaffe 
AL(1), Oltrogge LM(7)(8), West-Roberts J(9), Rowland J(4)(10), Manga M(4)(11), 
Savage DF(2)(7)(8), Greening C(12), Baker BJ(13)(14), Banfield 
JF(15)(16)(17)(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Group in Microbiology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(2)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.
(4)Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(5)Environmental Metagenomics, Research Center One Health Ruhr of the University 
Alliance Ruhr, Faculty of Chemistry,, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, 
Essen, Germany.
(6)Cleaner Air Oregon Program, Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, 
Portland, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA, USA.
(8)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 
94720, USA.
(9)Environmental Science, Policy and Management, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(10)Earth and Env. Sciences Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los 
Alamos, NM, USA.
(11)University of Duisburg-Essen, Universitätsstraße 5, 45141, Essen, Germany.
(12)Department of Microbiology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash 
University, Clayton, Australia.
(13)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas, Austin, USA.
(14)Department of Marine Science, University of Texas, Austin, USA.
(15)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. 
jbanfield@berkeley.edu.
(16)Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. 
jbanfield@berkeley.edu.
(17)Environmental Science, Policy and Management, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA, USA. jbanfield@berkeley.edu.
(18)Department of Marine Science, University of Texas, Austin, USA. 
jbanfield@berkeley.edu.
(19)Energy Geoscience Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, 
CA, USA. jbanfield@berkeley.edu.

BACKGROUND: Biofilms in sulfide-rich springs present intricate microbial 
communities that play pivotal roles in biogeochemical cycling. We studied 
chemoautotrophically based biofilms that host diverse CPR bacteria and grow in 
sulfide-rich springs to investigate microbial controls on biogeochemical 
cycling.
RESULTS: Sulfide springs biofilms were investigated using bulk geochemical 
analysis, genome-resolved metagenomics, and scanning transmission X-ray 
microscopy (STXM) at room temperature and 87 K. Chemolithotrophic 
sulfur-oxidizing bacteria, including Thiothrix and Beggiatoa, dominate the 
biofilms, which also contain CPR Gracilibacteria, Absconditabacteria, 
Saccharibacteria, Peregrinibacteria, Berkelbacteria, Microgenomates, and 
Parcubacteria. STXM imaging revealed ultra-small cells near the surfaces of 
filamentous bacteria that may be CPR bacterial episymbionts. STXM and NEXAFS 
spectroscopy at carbon K and sulfur L2,3 edges show that filamentous bacteria 
contain protein-encapsulated spherical elemental sulfur granules, indicating 
that they are sulfur oxidizers, likely Thiothrix. Berkelbacteria and 
Moranbacteria in the same biofilm sample are predicted to have a novel electron 
bifurcating group 3b [NiFe]-hydrogenase, putatively a sulfhydrogenase, 
potentially linked to sulfur metabolism via redox cofactors. This complex could 
potentially contribute to symbioses, for example, with sulfur-oxidizing bacteria 
such as Thiothrix that is based on cryptic sulfur cycling. One Doudnabacteria 
genome encodes adjacent sulfur dioxygenase and rhodanese genes that may convert 
thiosulfate to sulfite. We find similar conserved genomic architecture 
associated with CPR bacteria from other sulfur-rich subsurface ecosystems.
CONCLUSIONS: Our combined metagenomic, geochemical, spectromicroscopic, and 
structural bioinformatics analyses of biofilms growing in sulfide-rich springs 
revealed consortia that contain CPR bacteria and sulfur-oxidizing 
Proteobacteria, including Thiothrix, and bacteria from a new family within 
Beggiatoales. We infer roles for CPR bacteria in sulfur and hydrogen cycling. 
Video Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-023-01704-w
PMCID: PMC10811913
PMID: 38273328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JFB is a co-founder of Metagenomi.