1. Microb Ecol. 2018 Aug;76(2):419-429. doi: 10.1007/s00248-017-1141-5. Epub 2018
 Feb 1.

Construction of Effective Minimal Active Microbial Consortia for Lignocellulose 
Degradation.

Puentes-Téllez PE(1)(2), Falcao Salles J(3).

Author information:
(1)Microbial Community Ecology, GELIFES - Groningen Institute for Evolutionary 
Life Sciences, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 7, 9747 AG, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Biology, Institute of Environmental Biology, Ecology and 
Biodiversity Group, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Microbial Community Ecology, GELIFES - Groningen Institute for Evolutionary 
Life Sciences, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 7, 9747 AG, Groningen, The 
Netherlands. j.falcao.salles@rug.nl.

Enriched microbial communities, obtained from environmental samples through 
selective processes, can effectively contribute to lignocellulose degradation. 
Unfortunately, fully controlled industrial degradation processes are difficult 
to reach given the intrinsically dynamic nature and complexity of the microbial 
communities, composed of a large number of culturable and unculturable species. 
The use of less complex but equally effective microbial consortia could improve 
their applications by allowing for more controlled industrial processes. Here, 
we combined ecological theory and enrichment principles to develop an effective 
lignocellulose-degrading minimal active microbial Consortia (MAMC). Following an 
enrichment of soil bacteria capable of degrading lignocellulose material from 
sugarcane origin, we applied a reductive-screening approach based on molecular 
phenotyping, identification, and metabolic characterization to obtain a 
selection of 18 lignocellulose-degrading strains representing four metabolic 
functional groups. We then generated 65 compositional replicates of MAMC 
containing five species each, which vary in the number of functional groups, 
metabolic potential, and degradation capacity. The characterization of the MAMC 
according to their degradation capacities and functional diversity measurements 
revealed that functional diversity positively correlated with the degradation of 
the most complex lignocellulosic fraction (lignin), indicating the importance of 
metabolic complementarity, whereas cellulose and hemicellulose degradation were 
either negatively or not affected by functional diversity. The screening method 
described here successfully led to the selection of effective MAMC, whose 
degradation potential reached up 96.5% of the degradation rates when all 18 
species were present. A total of seven assembled synthetic communities were 
identified as the most effective MAMC. A consortium containing Stenotrophomonas 
maltophilia, Paenibacillus sp., Microbacterium sp., Chryseobacterium taiwanense, 
and Brevundimonas sp. was found to be the most effective degrading synthetic 
community.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-017-1141-5
PMCID: PMC6061470
PMID: 29392382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest. ETHICAL APPROVAL: This article does not 
contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the 
authors.