1. ISME J. 2018 Apr;12(4):997-1007. doi: 10.1038/s41396-017-0041-5. Epub 2018 Jan
 30.

Coordinated gene expression between Trichodesmium and its microbiome over 
day-night cycles in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre.

Frischkorn KR(1)(2), Haley ST(2), Dyhrman ST(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, 10025, USA.
(2)Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Palisades, NY, 10964, USA.
(3)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, 10025, USA. sdyhrman@ldeo.columbia.edu.
(4)Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Palisades, NY, 10964, USA. 
sdyhrman@ldeo.columbia.edu.

Trichodesmium is a widespread, N2 fixing marine cyanobacterium that drives 
inputs of newly fixed nitrogen and carbon into the oligotrophic ecosystems where 
it occurs. Colonies of Trichodesmium ubiquitously occur with heterotrophic 
bacteria that make up a diverse microbiome, and interactions within this 
Trichodesmium holobiont could influence the fate of fixed carbon and nitrogen. 
Metatranscriptome sequencing was performed on Trichodesmium colonies collected 
during high-frequency Lagrangian sampling in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre 
(NPSG) to identify possible interactions between the Trichodesmium host and 
microbiome over day-night cycles. Here we show significantly coordinated 
patterns of gene expression between host and microbiome, many of which had 
significant day-night periodicity. The functions of the co-expressed genes 
suggested a suite of interactions within the holobiont linked to key resources 
including nitrogen, carbon, and iron. Evidence of microbiome reliance on 
Trichodesmium-derived vitamin B12 was also detected in co-expression patterns, 
highlighting a dependency that could shape holobiont community structure. 
Collectively, these patterns of expression suggest that biotic interactions 
could influence colony cycling of resources like nitrogen and vitamin B12, and 
decouple activities, like N2 fixation, from typical abiotic drivers of 
Trichodesmium physiological ecology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41396-017-0041-5
PMCID: PMC5864210
PMID: 29382945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

===== OPEN-ACCESS FULL TEXT (local file trichodesmium-frischkorn-41396_2017_Article_41.pdf) =====

The ISME Journal (2018) 12:997 –1007
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-017-0041-5
ARTICLE
Coordinated gene expression between Trichodesmium and its
microbiome over day –night cycles in the North Paci ﬁc Subtropical
Gyre
Kyle R Frischkorn 1,2 ●
Sheean T Haley 2 ●
Sonya T Dyhrman 1,2
Received: 3 June 2017 / Revised: 3 October 2017 / Accepted: 16 December 2017 / Published online: 30 January 2018
© International Society for Microbial Ecology 2018
Abstract
Trichodesmium is a widespread, N 2 ﬁxing marine cyanobacterium that drives inputs of newly ﬁxed nitrogen and carbon into
the oligotrophic ecosystems where it occurs. Colonies of Trichodesmium ubiquitously occur with heterotrophic bacteria that
make up a diverse microbiome, and interactions within this Trichodesmium holobiont could in ﬂuence the fate of ﬁxed
carbon and nitrogen. Metatranscriptome sequencing was performed on Trichodesmium colonies collected during high-
frequency Lagrangian sampling in the North Paci ﬁc Subtropical Gyre (NPSG) to identify possible interactions between the
Trichodesmium host and microbiome over day –night cycles. Here we show signi ﬁcantly coordinated patterns of gene
expression between host and microbiome, many of which had signi ﬁcant day –night periodicity. The functions of the co-
expressed genes suggested a suite of interactions within the holobiont linked to key resources including nitrogen, carbon,
and iron. Evidence of microbiome reliance on Trichodesmium-derived vitamin B12 was also detected in co-expression
patterns, highlighting a dependency that could shape holobiont community structure. Collectively, these patterns of
expression suggest that biotic interactions could in ﬂuence colony cycling of resources like nitrogen and vitamin B12, and
decouple activities, like N 2 ﬁxation, from typical abiotic drivers of Trichodesmium physiological ecology.
Introduction
The cyanobacterium Trichodesmium is biogeochemically
important in nutrient-poor oligotrophic ocean ecosystems
because of its ability to supply ﬁxed nitrogen to the water
column [1]. Through biological N2 ﬁxation, Trichodesmiumis
estimated to supply approximately half of the total ﬁxed
nitrogen in the ocean [ 1, 2]. As such, Trichodesmium plays a
keystone role in fueling marine primary production that is
otherwise limited by the availability of nitrogen across much
of the oligotrophic ocean gyres [ 3, 4]. The dissolved organic
matter produced through this primary production is one of the
largest pools of reduced carbon on earth, and its fate in the
ocean is hypothesized to be greatly in ﬂuenced by microbe-
microbe interactions [ 5]. These interactions can span entire
microbial communities and are subject to environmental and
evolutionary pressures that work in tandem to in ﬂuence
ecology and subsequent biogeochemical impact [6]. In marine
microbial communities, photosynthetic and heterotrophic
bacteria have been shown to exhibit synchronous periodic
gene expression patterns over day –night cycles that are
attributed to cascades in metabolic activity sparked by pri-
mary productivity [ 7–9]. The taxonomic patterns of these
responses in free-living communities were similar between
coastal and open ocean systems, suggesting conserved eco-
logical interactions and synergistic activities that could be
used to inform or predict biogeochemical transformations [7].
T h ep r e s e n c eo fb a c t e r i ao nTrichodesmium ﬁlaments was
ﬁrst noted in the 1980s [ 10], and it is now appreciated that
Trichodesmium colonies ubiquitously occur with these het-
erotrophic bacterial epibionts [ 11–14]. This microbiome is
distinct from the bacteria found free living in the water col-
umn [ 15], and varies across ocean basins [ 14]. Such
tight associations between photosynthetic diazotroph and
heterotrophic bacteria, in conjunction with detection of
* Sonya T Dyhrman
sdyhrman@ldeo.columbia.edu
1 Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10025, USA
2 Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Palisades, NY 10964, USA
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-017-0041-5) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
1234567890();,:
microenvironments of depleted oxygen within colonies, led to
the hypothesis that these interactions could facilitate exchange
of organic carbon, ﬁxed N 2, iron, and vitamins [ 10]. Meta-
genomic analyses of Trichodesmium consortia have begun to
elucidate the functional underpinnings of the relationship
between host and microbiome, with the abundance and
diversity of microbiome genes related to phosphorus acqui-
sition, iron cycling, carbon metabolism, and vitamin B12
transport further suggesting that the exchange of critical
resources between host and microbiome could occur [11, 13].
The functional potential recovered from Trichodesmium
consortia indicates a suite of mechanisms that might
underlie previously observed dynamics between host and
microbiome. For example, selective modulation of the
microbiome community with quorum sensing molecules,
which Trichodesmium does not have receptors for, resulted
in increased activity of the organic phosphate hydrolyzing
enzyme alkaline phosphatase within colonies [ 16]. This
ﬁnding suggests that the interactions and activities of the
microbiome could modulate phosphorus cycling in colo-
nies, and underscores gene expression analyses that indicate
a phosphorus-limited microenvironment within colonies
may be decoupled from the surrounding water column [ 17].
The dynamics of how the other metabolic functions
observed in metagenomes are partitioned and expressed
between Trichodesmium and the microbiome may yield
insight into the nature of this relationship, helping to
determine whether epibionts are important members of
these consortia or simply stochastic colonizers.
New evidence of conserved relationships between Tri-
chodesmium and speciﬁc epibionts across ocean basins [ 13,
14] suggest that these host –microbiome interactions are
widely conserved and could be used to inform or predict
biogeochemical transformations, as has been demonstrated
for free-living communities [ 7]. For example, synchroni-
zation of carbon and nitrogen metabolic processes between
Trichodesmium and the microbiome could alter the ﬂux of
limiting resources like nitrogen from the colony to the water
column, and ultimately in ﬂuence the primary production
and carbon cycling these resources support. Here we used
metatranscriptomic sequencing of Trichodesmium colonies
collected during high-frequency Lagrangian sampling over
day–night transitions in the NPSG to identify the coordi-
nated patterns in host and microbiome gene expression that
underpin interactions within the holobiont.
Materials and methods
Sample collection
Sampling was carried out between 27 July and 30 July 2015
in the NPSG (Fig. 1a). Trichodesmium samples were
obtained with six hauls of a 130 μm mesh size net tow
through surface seawater every 4 h starting at approximately
1:30 p.m. on 27 July. Trichodesmium colonies were
isolated by hand and washed of non-tightly associated
Fig. 1 Sampling location and holobiont co-expression modules. a
Lagrangian sampling was carried out Northeast of Station ALOHA in
the North Paci ﬁc Subtropical Gyre with an approximate location
indicated by a dashed box in the left panel, with an expanded view in
the right panel. Sampling followed a drifter track (gray line) with dots
demarcating where samples were taken and the light conditions at the
time of collection, either night ( ﬁlled symbols) or day (open symbols).
b A dendrogram showing the 33 co-expression modules generated
from Trichodesmium and microbiome metatranscriptomes. Horizontal
bars indicate the number of orthologous groups (OGs) per module,
each of which contained representatives from Trichodesmium and
microbiome subsets. Squares on the far right indicate the presence of
OGs with signi ﬁcantly periodic expression as determined by RAIN
analysis [ 29]
998 K. R. Frischkorn et al.
microorganisms by serial transfer through 0.2 μm sterile-
ﬁltered surface seawater after Frischkorn et al. [ 11]. Studies
using a similar approach for colony collection have shown
that the dominant heterotrophic bacterial species tightly
associated with Trichodesmium colonies are conserved
within, and to some extent across, ocean basins [ 13, 14].
Therefore, this approach should yield the stable, tightly
associated microbiome, limiting the presence of opportu-
nistic colonizers, which would contribute to colony function
in a transient way. An average of 14 Trichodesmium colo-
nies were isolated and preserved per time point. Sampling
was performed under red light during the time points at
night. Colonies were cleaned within roughly 15 min of
collection and immediately ﬁltered by gentle vacuum onto
5 μm, 47 mm polycarbonate ﬁlters and stored in liquid
nitrogen until RNA extraction.
RNA extraction and sequencing
Prokaryotic RNA was extracted with the Qiagen RNeasy
Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hildern, Germany) with a minor mod-
iﬁcation to the lysis step. Brie ﬂy, ~500 µl zirconia/silica
beads (0.5 mm) were added to each sample tube after the
addition of Buffer RLT, and the samples were vortexed for
5 min. The resulting lysate was processed as per the
remainder of the manufacturer's instructions, including on-
column DNase digestion (RNase-free DNase Kit, Qiagen).
Prokaryotic RNA was enriched in the eluted total RNA with
a MICROBEnrich Kit (ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁc, Waltham,
MA, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions.
Ribosomal RNA was removed using the Ribo-Zero Mag-
netic Kit for bacteria (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) as
per the manufacturer's instructions. Puri ﬁed prokaryotic
mRNA was concentrated using the RNeasy MinElute
Cleanup Kit (Qiagen) according to the directions provided
by the manufacturer. The mRNA concentration and quality
was assessed with a BioAnalyzer using the RNA 6000
Nano Kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA).
The Illumina TruSeq RNA sample preparation kit was used
by the JP Sulzberger Genome Center at Columbia Uni-
versity (CUGC). Sequencing of 60 million paired end reads
from each sample was performed on an Illumina HiSeq at
the CUGC. Sequences were deposited in the NCBI SRA
under accession number PRJNA381915.
Metatranscriptome analysis
Sequenced reads were trimmed, normalized, and assembled
following the Eel Pond Protocol for mRNAseq [ 18],
yielding 1,809,695 contigs total from across the 16 time
points. To create one master assembly to which reads from
all 16 time points could be mapped, individual assemblies
were pooled together and clustered at 98% identity using
CD-Hit to combine highly similar sequences across the
samples [ 19–22]. This clustering yielded 1,247,416 contigs
total. The merged assembly was then ﬁltered to remove
sequences shorter than 210 nucleotides and translated into
corresponding amino acid sequences using Prodigal ’s
metagenomics setting [ 23].
Taxonomic af ﬁliation of contigs into the Trichodesmium
and microbiome subsets was determined using DIAMOND
[24] against the NCBI nr database and analyzed using
MEGAN5 software [ 25]. Functional annotations were
obtained by DIAMOND against the UniRef90 database [ 26]
as well as the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG) with the online Automatic Annotation Server
using the single-directional best-hit method targeted to
prokaryotes and with the metagenomic option selected.
Consensus annotations for orthologous groups (OGs) were
determined by taking the most abundant UniRef or KEGG
annotation for all proteins within that group. In some
instances, similar KEGG submodule categories were com-
bined to simplify ﬁgures. The amino acid metabolism
category includes arginine and proline metabolism, aro-
matic amino acid metabolism, branched-chain amino acid
metabolism, cysteine and methionine metabolism, histidine
metabolism, and serine and threonine metabolism KEGG
submodules. The carbohydrate metabolism category
includes central carbohydrate metabolism and other carbo-
hydrate metabolism KEGG submodules. The sugar trans-
port and metabolism includes saccharide and polyol
transport system and sugar metabolism KEGG submodules.
The transport category includes ABC-2 type and other
transport systems, metallic cation, iron siderophore and
vitamin B12 transport system, mineral and organic ion
transport system, and peptide and nickel transport system
KEGG submodules. Taxonomic identity of the most abun-
dant proteins making up each OG is reported in the Sup-
plementary Dataset and represents the most abundant
UniRef annotation taxonomy for that group.
Read mapping to clustered and size- ﬁltered contigs was
carried out with RSEM and the default settings with the
exception of using the paired end option and the bowtie2
option [ 27]. On average, over 98% of reads from each time
point mapped to this clustered assembly. Read counts were
summed across OGs separately for Trichodesmium and
heterotrophic bacterial epibiont-identi ﬁed contigs. The OGs
were generated by performing a reciprocal comparison with
DIAMOND followed by MCL (Markov cluster algorithm)
set to an in ﬂation parameter of 1.4, as described elsewhere
[11, 28], yielding 462,229 OGs total.
To keep downstream analyses conservative, only those
OGs with read coverage of >100 and 200 reads total for the
Trichodesmium and microbiome subsets, respectively,
across all time points were used in downstream analyses.
This approach is consistent with previous work in other
Coordinated gene expression between Trichodesmium and its microbiome 999
systems [ 9, 29]. With this conservative approach, a total of
3,188 Trichodesmium OGs and 4,827 microbiome OGs
recruited suf ﬁcient read coverage across the 16 samples for
subsequent analyses (Supplementary Dataset). Read counts
of these abundant OGs in the Trichodesmium and micro-
biome subsets were normalized using the Variance Stabi-
lizing Transformation (VST) in DESeq [ 30]. Signi ﬁcant
periodicity in normalized OG expression was determined
using Rhythmicity Analysis Incorporating Non-parametric
Methods (RAIN) [ 29] in R. OGs with p values <0.1 after
false-discovery rate correction [ 31] were considered to have
signiﬁcant periodicity after Wilson et al. [ 9].
To cluster consortia OGs into co-expression modules,
counts from Trichodesmium and microbiome subsets were
ﬁrst pooled. The combined subsets were then normalized as
a whole using VST in DESeq [ 30]. Normalized read counts
were then clustered using the R package weighted correla-
tion network analysis (WGCNA) [ 32] with a soft threshold
of 6 selected after a scale-free network topology test and the
“blockwiseModules” command set with a minimum module
size of 30 OGs and a cut height of 0.25 after Wilson et al.
[9]. A simpli ﬁed visualization of the cluster dendrogram
produced by WGCNA was generated by hierarchically
clustering the pooled, normalized read counts in each
module using the hclust command in R.
Results and discussion
Coordinated expression in the Trichodesmium
holobiont
High-frequency Lagrangian sampling of Trichodesmium
colonies generated a total of 16 metatranscriptome samples
spread over 3 day –night transitions in the NPSG (Fig. 1a).
After mapping to a merged de novo assembly, read counts
were partitioned between Trichodesmium and all hetero-
trophic bacteria OGs as determined by MEGAN [ 25] and
summed for each OG. The microbiome OG subset was
dominated by the genera Pseudoalteromonas and Alter-
omonas (Supplementary Dataset). Other abundant genera
included Fulvivirga (Bacteroidetes) and Nisaea (Alpha-
proteobacteria) (Supplementary Dataset). These genera are
common members of the Trichodesmium microbiome based
on previous 16S and metagenomic surveys of Tricho-
desmium epibiont diversity [ 11–14].
Expression pro ﬁles from the Trichodesmium and
microbiome OGs were analyzed with a WGCNA [ 7, 9, 32]
to ascertain if there was signi ﬁcant co-expression between
Trichodesmium and the microbiome. Expression patterns
were signi ﬁcantly coordinated between Trichodesmium and
the microbiome, with 3,140 Trichodesmium and 4,730
epibiont OGs clustering into 33 WGCNA co-expression
modules (Fig. 1b). The presence of OGs from both Tri-
chodesmium and the microbiome within every signi ﬁcant
co-expression module indicates that gene expression is
tightly integrated within the holobiont. Many co-expression
modules were also dominated by microbiome OGs
(Fig. 1b), such as Module 9, which was composed of a suite
of different functions including those related to ribosomes,
sugar transport and metabolism, ATP synthesis, and phos-
phate and amino acid transport functions (Supplementary
Figure 1). The presence of microbiome-dominated modules
suggests that there is signi ﬁcant co-expression between
epibionts. Together, these patterns of co-expression suggest
coordination between Trichodesmium and the microbiome,
as well as between epibionts within the microbiome.
Dynamics within the majority of these co-expression
modules were de ﬁned by diel oscillations in gene expres-
sion that had signi ﬁcant periodicity as determined by RAIN
[29] (Fig. 1b). In Trichodesmium, these periodic OGs
included gene sets related to photosynthesis, phosphorus,
iron, N 2, and carbon ﬁxation among others (Supplementary
Figure 2; Supplementary Dataset). Global expression pat-
terns in Trichodesmium would be expected to be dominated
by diel patterns, as photosynthetic and N 2 ﬁxing activities
are both tightly regulated across day –night cycles [ 1]. Here,
periodic microbiome expression patterns strikingly mirrored
those observed in Trichodesmium (Supplementary Fig-
ure 3). In the microbiome, OGs with day –night periodicity
included genes related to stress responses, nitrogen meta-
bolism, carbon metabolism, and cofactor and vitamin bio-
synthesis among others (Supplementary Figure 2;
Supplementary Dataset). Similar synchronous diel tran-
scriptional oscillations have also been observed between
unicellular marine cyanobacteria and free-living hetero-
trophic bacteria, as heterotrophic activity appears to be tied
to pulses in primary production [ 7, 8]. Overall, microbiome
activities are likely tied to both Trichodesmium photo-
synthesis and N 2 ﬁxation as the release of dissolved nitro-
gen and organic carbon is tied to these processes. Though
Trichodesmium ﬁxes both carbon and N 2 during daylight
[33], net release of organic carbon, dissolved organic
nitrogen, and ammonium oscillate throughout the day and
night [ 34]. The extensive coordination and functional
characteristics in gene expression between Trichodesmium
and the microbiome suggest that the physiology of these
associated microbes are attuned to the host, and could thus
inﬂuence the cycling and fate of carbon, nitrogen, and other
resources in the colony microenvironment.
Coordinated expression in nitrogen and carbon
pathways
The OGs related to Trichodesmium N2 ﬁxation, including
the genes of the nitrogenase-encoding nif cassette, were
1000 K. R. Frischkorn et al.
clustered into co-expression Module 3. Module 3 contained
348 Trichodesmium and 57 microbiome OGs (Fig. 1b) and
was dominated by OGs with maximum or minimum
expression just prior to peak photosynthetically active
radiation (PAR) and strong day –night periodicity (Fig. 2a).
Strikingly, Module 3 contained a suite of microbiome OGs
related to nitrogen processes, which mirrored expression of
nitrogenase subunit OGs in Trichodesmium (Fig. 2b). These
nitrogen-related microbiome OGs include amino-
transferases, amino acid adenylation proteins, and pepti-
dases with signi ﬁcantly periodic patterns (Fig. 2b).
Trichodesmium releases biologically available nitrogen in
culture and the environment, even when maintained axe-
nically [ 34–37]. The extent to which this release facilitates
cultivation of a symbiotic heterotrophic bacterial micro-
biome or whether associated epibionts are simply a product
of opportunistic, stochastic colonization remains an out-
standing question. However, this expression data, coupled
with recent observations of ubiquitous epibionts across
ocean basins [ 13, 14], underscores conserved relationships
in these consortia wherein the transfer of Trichodesmium-
derived ﬁxed N 2 may synchronize microbiome metabolism
with host physiology.
Expression patterns between host and microbiome also
indicate possible synchrony between photosynthetic carbon
ﬁxation and release by Trichodesmium and the respiration
of that organic carbon by the microbiome. Module 8 had
strong day–night periodicity in both Trichodesmium and the
Fig. 2 Resource-related patterns
in the nif-containing co-
expression Module 3. a
Photosynthetically active
radiation (PAR) levels are
shown over the duration of the
Lagrangian sampling period and
correspond to vertical bars in the
heatmap, which depicts row
averaged relative expression of
the signi ﬁcantly co-expressed
Trichodesmium and microbiome
orthologous groups (OGs).
Black bars denote rows that are
microbiome OGs. Colored
circles show functional
annotations based on KEGG
submodules. b Details of select
OG expression in Module 3
highlighting patterns between
Trichodesmium and the
microbiome related to nitrogen
and iron metabolism. Gray bars
indicate dark conditions.
Tricho., Trichodesmium;
nitrogenase avg., average
normalized expression for all nif
genes clustered in Module 3;
microbiome N metab. avg.,
average normalized expression
of nitrogen-related OGs in the
microbiome subset in Module 3,
including aminotransferases,
amino acid adenylation proteins,
and peptidases; Tricho. other Fe
processes avg., average
normalized expression of iron-
related OGs including
cytochromes, iron-sulfur cluster
assembly protein, iron-requiring
hydrogenase, ferrochelatase,
ferredoxin, and ferredoxin-
dependent bilin reductase;
microbiome stress avg., average
normalized expression of a
chaperone and two general stress
proteins
Coordinated gene expression between Trichodesmium and its microbiome 1001
microbiome and contained a high proportion of Tricho-
desmium photosystem and carbon ﬁxation OGs, including a
RuBisCO subunit, three photosystem subunits, and a phy-
coerythrin assembly protein (Fig. 3a). Trichodesmium
photosynthetic- related and carbon ﬁxation-related OGs
were segregated into two signi ﬁcantly co-expressed pat-
terns, which had peak expression during light and dark
periods (Fig. 3b; Supplementary Dataset). The microbiome
subset of this module contained a number of functions that
suggested synchronization of carbon metabolism with Tri-
chodesmium including those related to gluconeogenesis, a
sugar binding protein, sugar transporter, and carbohydrate
active enzymes, as well as OGs related to ribosome func-
tions and amino acid metabolism (Fig. 3). The expression
patterns in these microbiome OGs exhibited peaks in both
light and dark conditions that mirrored those of Tricho-
desmium photosystem and carbon ﬁxation-related gene
expression (Fig. 3b). The microbiome pyruvate carboxyl-
transferase, an enzyme from gluconeogenesis and a trans-
porter of C 4-dicarboxylates like succinate, fumarate, and
malate [ 38] peaked during daylight. Peaking during night-
time were two microbiome glycosyltransferase enzymes,
along with Trichodesmium RuBisCO (Fig. 3b). Overall,
these microbiome expression patterns are consistent with
organic carbon metabolism in the microbiome being tuned
to periodic ﬂuxes of Trichodesmium organic carbon.
Trichodesmium releases an estimated 50% of ﬁxed car-
bon [34] and up to 20% of ﬁxed N2 from colonies [ 33]. This
loss of resources is paradoxical in the oligotrophic ocean;
however, it may support microbiome colonization and
beneﬁcial syntrophic interactions with the holobiont. Tra-
cing these potential interactions in situ is challenging, but
they could exert important unrecognized feedbacks on the
physiological ecology of Trichodesmium populations. For
example, one bene ﬁt of the microbiome could be that
microbiome respiration of Trichodesmium organic carbon
alleviates carbon limitation of photosynthesis as well as O 2
inhibition of N 2 ﬁxation [ 10, 13]. Such a feedback is con-
sistent with the coordinated patterns of gene expression
between host and microbiome seen here. If the microbiome
modulates the Trichodesmium microenvironment in a way
that decouples rates of carbon and N 2 ﬁxation from water
column geochemistry, or other abiotic drivers of these
activities, this would exacerbate ongoing challenges in
Fig. 3 Patterns in carbon ﬁxation
and respiration in co-expression
Module 8. a Photosynthetically
active radiation (PAR) levels are
shown over the duration of the
Lagrangian sampling period and
correspond to vertical bars in the
heatmap, which depicts row
averaged relative expression of
the signi ﬁcantly co-expressed
Trichodesmium and microbiome
orthologous groups (OGs).
Black bars denote rows that are
microbiome OGs. Colored
circles show functional
annotations based on KEGG
submodules. b Detail of
expression patterns in
Trichodesmium photosystem
and carbon ﬁxation OGs and
microbiome respiration OGs.
Gray bars indicate dark
conditions. Microbiome
respiration OGs averaged
include pyruvate
carboxyltransferase and a C 4-
dicarboxylate transporter in the
top panel and two
glycosyltransferases in the
bottom panel. Tricho.,
Trichodesmium
1002 K. R. Frischkorn et al.
modeling these processes in the oligotrophic ocean [ 39, 40].
Further, the coordinated expression of microbiome nitrogen
and carbon metabolism genes with Trichodesmium activ-
ities, like N 2 ﬁxation and carbon ﬁxation, might allow the
microbiome to in ﬂuence the net ﬂux of resources to the
water column.
Transcriptional evidence of shared phosphorus and
iron demand
In addition to the nif enzyme subunits and several OGs
related to photosynthesis, Module 3 also contained a num-
ber of additional Trichodesmium OGs encoding iron-
requiring proteins (Fig. 2b), suggesting complex coordina-
tion of resources across these processes. In Crocosphaera,a
marine diazotroph that decouples oxygen evolving photo-
synthesis and N 2 ﬁxation between day and night, respec-
tively, the necessary iron quotas are met by degradation of
metalloenzymes that liberate and subsequently repurpose
iron across different processes over day –night cycles [ 41].
Unlike Crocosphaera, Trichodesmium cannot shuttle iron
between photosynthetic and N 2 ﬁxing processes because
both occur during the day. The majority of Trichodesmium
iron-requiring OGs in Module 3 had peak daytime expres-
sion that mirrored nif and photosystem expression (Figs. 2b
and 3b), and included cytochromes, ferredoxin, ferrochela-
tase, ferredoxin-dependent bilin reductase, an iron-sulfur
cluster assembly protein, and an iron-requiring hydro-
genase. Also peaking during daylight in this module was an
OG identi ﬁed as ﬂavodoxin (Fig. 3b), an electron transport
protein that does not require iron and can substitute for
ferredoxin during low iron conditions [ 42]. In contrast, the
expression of an OG identi ﬁed as heme oxygenase, an
enzyme involved in liberating iron from organic complexes
[41], was opposite of nif expression in Trichodesmium
(Fig. 2b). In Crocosphaera, heme oxygenase also showed
diel variability with peak expression opposite that of
nitrogenase [41], suggesting that this enzyme could be used
to liberate iron for cellular processes that are not related to
N2 ﬁxation. In Module 3, a cytochrome biogenesis gene was
the only iron-requiring OG that had expression dynamics
similar to heme oxygenase (Fig. 2b), indicating that iron
liberated at night could be repurposed for use in electron
transport processes. Overall, the dynamics of gene expres-
sion in iron-related OGs in Trichodesmium underscore high
daytime iron requirements that likely modulate competition
for this critical resource within the holobiont over day –night
cycles.
In addition to nitrogen and iron processes, Tricho-
desmium also expressed OGs for phosphate uptake in
Module 3, with signi ﬁcantly periodic daytime expression
peaks that were slightly offset from expression of the OGs
for phosphonate hydrolysis, which also had signi ﬁcant
periodic expression but at a later peak time (Supplementary
Figure 4). These patterns likely indicate increased daytime
demand for phosphorus to support growth and N 2 ﬁxation in
Trichodesmium. Coincident with the expression of these
Trichodesmium genes in Module 3 was a suite of micro-
biome OGs including the chaperone htpG, one general
stress protein, and a uspA-like universal stress protein
(Fig. 2b). In other species of bacteria, these protein families
have been implicated in a variety of functions which are
modulated in response to stressors such as limitation for key
resources like phosphorus and iron as well as exposure to
antibiotics and oxidative agents [ 43, 44]. These patterns
suggest that relative to nitrogen, there may be an offset in
the peak bioavailability of resources like phosphorus or iron
to the microbiome. This offset could result in resource
limitation scenarios that oscillate within the holobiont
microenvironment. These data also highlight the complexity
of interactions within the holobiont that span multiple
resources. For example, time periods of peak N 2 ﬁxation
and photosynthesis, when biologically available resources
should be highest for the microbiome, are concurrent with
microbiome cellular stress. In conjunction with co-
expression in nitrogen and carbon functions, this observa-
tion could indicate a system where modulation of Tricho-
desmium-derived resources maintains a stable, tightly
regulated relationship between the host and microbiome. In
contrast, at the end of a bloom Trichodesmium releases an
abundance of organic material causing a change in com-
munity composition of the associated bacteria hypothesized
to be related to the growth of opportunistic copiotrophs
[45]. A similar phenomenon has also been observed in
bacteria that colonize corals, where an abundance of labile
carbon resulted in a shift towards more virulent activities
[46]. During non-bloom conditions in Trichodesmium,
avoiding such a resource-rich environment could help
maintain a bene ﬁcial microbiome and prevent the growth of
copiotrophs that could skew potential interactions towards
those that are deleterious or parasitic.
Microbiome dependence on Trichodesmium
cobalamin
Despite the critical importance of the B12 vitamin cobala-
min to all organisms, only select bacteria and archaea are
capable of de novo cobalamin biosynthesis, making
exchange between producers and non-producers critical [ 28,
47, 48]. Based on genome sequence analysis, Tricho-
desmium should possess the capability for de novo coba-
lamin biosynthesis [ 49], and OGs related to cobalamin
production were detected and expressed in Trichodesmium
across several co-expression modules largely without sig-
niﬁcant diel periodicity (Fig. 4a; Supplementary Figure 5).
Only one OG in the cobalamin biosynthesis pathway
Coordinated gene expression between Trichodesmium and its microbiome 1003
(cobW) was detected in the microbiome (Supplementary
Dataset), which indicates that these genes were either not
expressed at a high enough level to pass our analysis
threshold or that the microbiome members do not possess
the capability to synthesize cobalamin. Together with the
recent ﬁnding that a conserved Trichodesmium microbiome
member is a cobalamin auxotroph [ 13] and that marine
diazotrophs are known to secrete large amounts of this
vitamin [ 50], these results suggest that Trichodesmium
supplies cobalamin to the microbiome.
Recent ﬁndings have shown the form of cobalamin
produced by cyanobacteria, pseudocobalamin, is not readily
bioavailable to heterotrophic organisms [ 49, 51]. Prior to
use by heterotrophic bacteria, an adenine ligand on
cyanobacterial pseudocobalamin must be exchanged
with 5,6-dimethylbenzimidizole (DMB) — a process that
relies on an exogenous supply of DMB, de novo bio-
synthesis of DMB with the bluB gene or the alternative
oxygen-sensitive bzaABCDE pathway [52]— and ﬁnally the
activation of DMB with the enzyme nicotinate-nucleotide-
dimethylbenzimidazole phosphoribosyltransferase ( cobT)
[49, 51, 53]. Within the microbiome, the OG for cobalamin
uptake ( cobA/O) was detected in Module 4, a module
that also contained a suite of signi ﬁcantly co-expressed
Trichodesmium OGs for cobalamin synthesis and
cobalamin-dependent methionine synthase (Fig. 4b; Sup-
plementary Figure 1; Supplementary Figure 5). Supporting
the hypothesis that the microbiome is using Tricho-
desmium-derived cobalamin, the microbiome methionine
synthase was clustered in a co-expression module that also
contained microbiome cobT (Fig. 4b). However, despite this
transcriptional evidence for microbiome conversion of Tri-
chodesmium-derived pseudocobalamin and subsequent use,
homologs of bluB and bzaABCDE were not detected in the
microbiome subset, indicating that essential DMB is likely
supplied from a source outside the microbiome.
Contrary to the overwhelming majority of cyanobacteria
that do not possess the capability to synthesize or activate
DMB, the Trichodesmium IMS101 genome encodes the
bluB gene for DMB production [ 49]. Within our dataset, an
OG identi ﬁed as bluB was detected and expressed in Tri-
chodesmium Module 26 (Supplementary Figure 5). Fur-
thermore, an OG identi ﬁed as ﬂavin mononucleotide (FMN)
reductase, an enzyme that generates the precursor to DMB
and acts as the substrate of the BluB enzyme [ 53], was
detected in Trichodesmium Module 4 (Supplementary Fig-
ure 1) along with Trichodesmium OGs from the cobalamin
biosynthesis pathway, methionine synthase, and the
microbiome cobA/O (Fig. 4b). Strikingly, expression pat-
terns of Trichodesmium FMN reductase and cobalamin-
dependent methionine synthase had signi ﬁcant, anti-
correlated diel periodicity (Fig. 4b). One interpretation of
the presence of bluB could be that Trichodesmium uses
DMB to convert its own pseudocobalamin prior to down-
stream use of this vitamin. However, the anti-correlated
expression dynamics between DMB production and
cobalamin-dependent processes (Fig. 4b) seem to suggest
that Trichodesmium is not converting its own pseudocoba-
lamin prior to use. Instead, these data suggest that Tricho-
desmium both supplies pseudocobalamin to the microbiome
and controls the timing of subsequent ligand conversion
Fig. 4 Detection of cobalamin pathway orthologous groups (OGs) and
related transcriptional patterns. a Presence and absence of OGs from
the transcriptome data in the de novo cobalamin biosynthesis, uptake
and modi ﬁcation, and utilization pathways in Trichodesmium and the
microbiome. *Only cobT was detected in the microbiome. Colored
circles indicate corresponding expression patterns that are depicted in
b. b Detail of expression patterns in key cobalamin modi ﬁcation and
utilization OGs in Trichodesmium and the microbiome. FMN ﬂavin
mononucleotide, DMB, 5,6-dimethylbenzimidizole, Met. methionine,
Tricho. Trichodesmium . Gray bars indicate dark conditions
1004 K. R. Frischkorn et al.
within the microbiome, regulating this process to be out of
phase with their own cobalamin-dependent enzyme gene
expression. These synchronized transcriptional patterns
support evidence from metagenomic data that suggests that
in Trichodesmium consortia the direction of cobalamin
transfer is opposite that of the canonical pathway [ 13],
where heterotrophic bacterial producers typically share this
vitamin with photosynthetic algae in exchange for ﬁxed
carbon [ 28, 54]. The processes that govern recruitment and
maintenance of microbiome community structure are lar-
gely unknown, but the lack of evidence for microbiome
cobalamin biosynthesis is consistent with the hypothesis
from Lee et al. [ 13] that this vitamin could exert selective
pressure on microbiome community structure. If Tricho-
desmium DMB production does control subsequent micro-
biome cobalamin use, then this would be an example of a
microbiome dependency that drives the community struc-
ture of the Trichodesmium holobiont. This tightly controlled
structure both differentiates Trichodesmium colonies from
transient microbial consortia on particles that are dominated
by remineralization activities [ 55], and reinforces the
apparent microbiome in ﬂuence on the ﬂux of important
resources, like cobalamin, to the oligotrophic environment.
Conclusions
The future oceans are predicted to be warmer, higher in
CO2, and have expanded oligotrophic regions [ 40, 56, 57].
It is expected that these conditions will increase the rate of
Trichodesmium carbon and N 2 ﬁxation [ 56, 58] and
potentially magnify the relative importance of Tricho-
desmium activities within expanded regions of oligotrophy.
In other marine systems, these future ocean conditions are
known to destabilize the microbiome with resultant dele-
terious effects on the host [ 59–61]. Here we show that, like
these other host –microbiome systems, the Trichodesmium
microbiome is closely synchronized with the host, and that
host–microbiome interactions likely in ﬂuence the cycling of
carbon, nitrogen, iron, and cobalamin. To fully understand
and forecast future ocean dynamics, studies of Tricho-
desmium must consider the role of the microbiome.
Acknowledgements We thank the scientists who worked collabora-
tively on the 2015 research expedition as part of the Simons Colla-
boration on Ocean Processes and Ecology (SCOPE). For assistance at
sea, we thank the captain and crew of the R/V Kilo Moana, and
Samuel Wilson for serving as chief scientist. We also thank Frank
Aylward for assistance with statistical analyses and Matthew Harke,
Mónica Rouco, Katherine Heal, and Harriet Alexander for helpful
discussions of the data. Finally, we thank the three anonymous
reviewers whose comments and suggestions strengthened the manu-
script. This research was funded by the Simons Foundation (SCOPE
award ID 329108 to STD), and is a contribution of SCOPE. KRF was
partially supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship (DGE-16-44869).
Author contributions KRF and STD designed the study. All authors
carried out sampling. KRF performed lab work and analyzed the data.
KRF and STD wrote the manuscript with input from STH.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no con ﬂict of
interest.
References
1. Bergman B, Sandh G, Lin S, Larsson J, Carpenter EJ. Tricho-
desmium— a widespread marine cyanobacterium with unusual
nitrogen ﬁxation properties. FEMS Microbiol Rev.
2013;37:286–2.
2. Sohm JA, Webb EA, Capone DG. Emerging patterns of marine
nitrogen ﬁxation. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2011;9:499 –8.
3. Falkowski PG, Barber RT, Smetacek V. Biogeochemical controls
and feedbacks on ocean primary production. Science.
1998;281:200–6.
4. Zehr JP. Nitrogen ﬁxation by marine cyanobacteria. Trends
Microbiol. 2011;19:162 –73.
5. Moran MA, Kujawinski EB, Stubbins A, Fatland R, Aluwihare
LI, Buchan A, et al. Deciphering ocean carbon in a changing
world. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016;113:3143 –51.
6. Brussaard CPD, Bidle KD, Pedrós-alió C, Legrand C. The inter-
active microbial ocean. Nat Microbiol. 2016;2:1 –2.
7. Aylward FO, Eppley JM, Smith JM, Chavez FP, Scholin CA,
DeLong EF. Microbial community transcriptional networks are
conserved in three domains at ocean basin scales. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. 2015;112:5443 –48.
8. Ottesen EA, Young CR, Gifford SM, Eppley JM, Marin R,
Schuster SC, et al. Multispecies diel transcriptional oscillations in
open ocean heterotrophic bacterial assemblages. Science.
2014;345:207–12.
9. Wilson ST, Aylward FO, Ribalet F, Barone B, Casey JR, Connell
PE. et al. Coordinated regulation of growth, activity and tran-
scription in natural populations of the unicellular nitrogen- ﬁxing
cyanobacterium Crocosphaera. Nat Microbiol. 2017;2:1 –9.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.118.
10. Paerl HW, Bebout BM, Prufert LE. Bacterial associations with
marine Oscillatoria sp. ( Trichodesmium sp.) populations: eco-
physiological implications. J Phycol. 1989;25:773 –84.
11. Frischkorn KR, Rouco M, Van Mooy BAS, Dyhrman ST. Epi-
bionts dominate metabolic functional potential of Trichodesmium
colonies from the oligotrophic ocean. ISME J. 2017;11:2090 –101.
12. Gradoville MR, Crump BC, Letelier RM, Church MJ, White AE.
Microbiome of Trichodesmium colonies from the North Paci ﬁc
Subtropical Gyre. Front Microbiol. 2017;8:1 –16. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmicb.2017.01122.
13. Lee MD, Walworth NG, Mcparland EL, Fu F, Mincer TJ, Levine
NM, et al. The Trichodesmium consortium: conserved hetero-
trophic co-occurrence and genomic signatures of potential inter-
actions. ISME J. 2017;11:1813 –24.
14. Rouco M, Haley ST, Dyhrman ST. Microbial diversity within the
Trichodesmium holobiont. Environ Microbiol. 2016;18:5151 –60.
15. Hmelo L, Van Mooy B, Mincer T. Characterization of bacterial
epibionts on the cyanobacterium Trichodesmium. Aquat Microb
Ecol. 2012;67:1 –14.
16. Van Mooy BAS, Hmelo LR, Sofen LE, Campagna SR, May AL,
Dyhrman ST, et al. Quorum sensing control of phosphorus
Coordinated gene expression between Trichodesmium and its microbiome 1005
acquisition in Trichodesmium consortia. ISME J.
2012;6:422–429.
17. Hewson I, Poretsky RS, Dyhrman ST, Zielinski B, White AE,
Tripp HJ, et al. Microbial community gene expression within
colonies of the diazotroph, Trichodesmium, from the Southwest
Paciﬁc Ocean. ISME J. 2009;3:1286 –300.
18. Brown CT, Sheneman LS, Camille CM, Rosenthal JH, Adina C.
khmer-protocols documentation. 2013. https://khmer-protocols.
readthedocs.io/en/latest/mrnaseq/index.html
19. Alexander H, Rouco M, Haley ST, Wilson ST, Karl DM, Dyhr-
man ST. Functional group-speci ﬁc traits drive phytoplankton
dynamics in the oligotrophic ocean. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2015;112:E5972–79.
20. Frischkorn KR, Harke MJ, Gobler CJ, Dyhrman ST. De novo
assembly of Aureococcus anophagefferens transcriptomes reveals
diverse responses to the low nutrient and low light conditions
present during blooms. Front Microbiol. 2014;5:1 –16.
21. Li W, Godzik A. Cd-hit: a fast program for clustering and com-
paring large sets of protein or nucleotide sequences. Bioinfor-
matics. 2006;22:1658 –59.
22. Varaljay VA, Howard EC, Sun S, Moran MA. Deep sequencing
of a dimethylsulfoniopropionate-degrading gene (dmdA) by using
PCR primer pairs designed on the basis of marine metagenomic
data. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2010;76:609 –17.
23. Hyatt D, Chen G-L, Locascio PF, Land ML, Larimer FW, Hauser
LJ. Prodigal: prokaryotic gene recognition and translation initia-
tion site identi ﬁcation. BMC Bioinform. 2010;11:1 –11. https://
doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-119.
24. Buch ﬁnk B, Xie C, Huson DH. Fast and sensitive protein align-
ment using DIAMOND. Nat Methods. 2015;12:59 –60.
25. Huson DH, El Hadidi M, Ruscheweyh H, Huson DH, Meta S.
Improved metagenome analysis using MEGAN5. 2013. http://ab.
inf.uni-tuebingen.de/software/megan5/
26. Suzek BE, Huang H, McGarvey P, Mazumder R, Wu CH. Uni-
Ref: comprehensive and non-redundant UniProt reference clus-
ters. Bioinformatics. 2007;23:1282 –88.
27. Li B, Dewey CN. RSEM: accurate transcript quanti ﬁcation from
RNA-Seq data with or without a reference genome. BMC
Bioinform. 2011;12:1 –16. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-
323.
28. Bertrand EM, McCrow JP, Moustafa A, Zheng H, McQuaid JB,
Delmont TO, et al. Phytoplankton –bacterial interactions mediate
micronutrient colimitation at the coastal Antarctic sea ice edge.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015;112:9938 –43.
29. Thaben PF, Westermark PO. Detecting rhythms in time series
with RAIN. J Biol Rhythms. 2014;29:391 –400.
30. Anders S, Huber W. Differential expression analysis for sequence
count data. Genome Biol. 2010;11:R106 https://doi.org/10.1186/
gb-2010-11-10-r1062010-11-10-r106.
31. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a
practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Stat Soc
Ser B. 1995;57:289 –300.
32. Langfelder P, Horvath S. WGCNA: an R package for weighted
correlation network analysis. BMC Bioinforma. 2008;9:1 –13.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-9-559.
33. Berthelot H, Bonnet S, Camps M, Grosso O. Assessment of the
dinitrogen released as ammonium and dissolved organic nitrogen
by unicellular and ﬁlamentous marine diazotrophic cyanobacteria
grown in culture. Front Mar Sci. 2015;2:1 –14.
34. Wannicke N, Koch BP, Voss M. Release of ﬁxed N 2 and C as
dissolved compounds by Trichodesmium erythraeum and Nodu-
laria spumigena under the in ﬂuence of high light and high
nutrient (P). Aquat Microb Ecol. 2009;57:175 –89.
35. Glibert PM, Bronk DA. Release of dissolved organic nitrogen by
marine diazotrophic cyanobacteria, Trichodesmium spp. Appl
Environ Microbiol. 1994;60:3996 –4000.
36. Mulholland MR, Bernhardt PW, Heil CA, Bronk DA, Neil JMO,
Boneillo G, et al. Nitrogen ﬁxation and release of ﬁxed nitrogen
by Trichodesmium spp. in the Gulf of Mexico. Limnol Oceanogr.
2006;51:1762–76.
37. Mulholland MR, Bronk DA, Capone DG. Dinitrogen ﬁxation and
release of ammonium and dissolved organic nitrogen by Tricho-
desmium. Aquat Microb Ecol. 2004;37:85 –94.
38. Janausch IG, Zientz E, Tran QH, Kro A. C 4-dicarboxylate carriers
and sensors in bacteria. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002;1553:39 –56.
39. Capone DG, Burns JA, Montoya JP, Subramaniam A, Mahaffey
C, Gunderson T. et al. Nitrogen ﬁxation by Trichodesmium spp.:
an important source of new nitrogen to the tropical and subtropical
North Atlantic Ocean. Glob Biogeochem Cycles. 2005;19:
GB2024. https://doi.org/10.1029/2004GB002331.
40. McGillicuddy DJ. Do Trichodesmium spp. populations in the
North Atlantic export most of the nitrogen they ﬁx? Glob Bio-
geochem Cycles. 2014;28:103 –14.
41. Saito MA, Bertrand EM, Dutkiewicz S, Bulygin VV, Moran DM,
Monteiro FM, et al. Iron conservation by reduction of metal-
loenzyme inventories in the marine diazotroph Crocosphaera
watsonii. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011;108:2184 –89.
42. Erdner DL, Anderson DM. Ferredoxin and ﬂavodoxin as bio-
chemical indicators of iron limitation during open-ocean iron
enrichment. Limnol Oceanogr. 1999;44:1609 –15.
43. Liu W, Karavolos MH, Bulmer DM, Allaoui A, Demarco R,
Hormaeche CE, et al. Role of the universal stress protein UspA of
Salmonella in growth arrest, stress and virulence. Microb Pathog.
2007;42:2–10.
44. Nachin L, Nannmark U, Nyström T, Nystro T. Differential roles
of the universal stress proteins of Escherichia coli in oxidative
stress resistance, adhesion, and motility. J Bacteriol.
2005;187:6265–72.
45. Spungin D, Pfreundt U, Berthelot H, Bonnet S, AlRoumi D,
Natale F, et al. Mechanisms of Trichodesmium bloom demise
within the New Caledonian Lagoon during the VAHINE meso-
cosm experiment. Biogeoscience. 2016;13:4187 –203.
46. Cárdenas A, Neave MJ, Haroon MF, Pogoreutz C, Rädecker N,
Wild C. et al. Excess labile carbon promotes the expression of
virulence factors in coral reef bacterioplankton. ISME J.
2017;00:1–18. https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2017.142.
47. Sañudo-Wilhelmy SA, Gómez-Consarnau L, Suffridge C, Webb
EA. The role of B vitamins in marine biogeochemistry. Annu Rev
Mar Sci. 2014;6:339 –67.
48. Warren MJ, Raux E, Schubert HL, Escalante-Semerena JC. The
biosynthesis of adenosylcobalamin (vitamin B12). Nat Prod Rep.
2002;19:390–12.
49. Helliwell KE, Lawrence AD, Holzer A, Scanlan DJ, Warren MJ,
Smith AG, et al. Cyanobacteria and eukaryotic algae use different
chemical variants of vitamin B12. Curr Biol. 2016;26:999 –08.
50. Bonnet S, Webb EA, Panzeca C, Karl DM, Capone DG, Sañudo-
Wilhelmy SA. Vitamin B12 excretion by cultures of the marine
cyanobacteria Crocosphaera and Synechococcus. Limnol Ocea-
nogr. 2010;55:1959 –64.
51. Heal KR, Qin W, Ribalet F, Bertagnolli AD, Coyote-Maestas W,
Hmelo LR, et al. Two distinct pools of B12 analogs reveal
community interdependencies in the ocean. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2016;114:364 –69.
52. Hazra AB, Han AW, Mehta AP, Mok KC, Osadchiy V, Begley
TP, et al. Anaerobic biosynthesis of the lower ligand of vitamin
B12. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015;112:10792 –97.
53. Taga ME, Larsen NA, Howard-Jones AR, Walsh CT, Walker GC.
BluB cannibalizes ﬂavin to form the lower ligand of vitamin B12.
Nature. 2007;446:449 –53.
54. Croft MT, Lawrence AD, Raux-deery E, Warren MJ, Smith AG.
Algae acquire vitamin B12 through a symbiotic relationship with
bacteria. Nature. 2005;438:90 –93.
1006 K. R. Frischkorn et al.
55. Fontanez KM, Eppley JM, Samo TJ, Karl DM, DeLong EF.
Microbial community structure and function on sinking particles
in the North Paci ﬁc Subtropical Gyre. Front Microbiol.
2015;6:1–14.
56. Hutchins DA, Walworth NG, Webb EA, Saito MA, Moran D,
McIlvin MR, et al. Irreversibly increased nitrogen ﬁxation in
Trichodesmium experimentally adapted to elevated carbon diox-
ide. Nat Commun. 2015;6:1 –7.
57. Riebesell U, Körtzinger A, Oschlies A. Sensitivities of marine
carbon ﬂuxes to ocean change. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2009;106:20602–9.
58. Hutchins DA, Fu F-X, Zhang Y, Warner ME, Feng Y, Portune K,
et al. CO 2 control of Trichodesmium N2 ﬁxation, photosynthesis,
growth rates, and elemental ratios: implications for past, present,
and future ocean biogeochemistry. Limnol Oceanogr.
2007;52:1293–304.
59. Ainsworth TD, Thurber RV, Gates RD. The future of coral reefs: a
microbial perspective. Trends Ecol Evol. 2010;25:233 –40.
60. Bourne DG, Morrow KM, Webster NS. Insights into the coral
microbiome: underpinning the health and resilience of reef eco-
systems. Annu Rev Microbiol. 2016;70:317 –40.
61. Lesser MP, Fiore C, Slattery M, Zaneveld J. Climate
change stressors destabilize the microbiome of the Caribbean
barrel sponge Xestospongia muta . J Exp Mar Bio Ecol.
2016;475:11–18.
Coordinated gene expression between Trichodesmium and its microbiome 1007
