1. Water Res. 2026 Jun 1;297:125665. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2026.125665. Epub 2026
 Mar 2.

Biofilm-suspension syntrophy drives synergistic electro-fermentation through 
engineered spatial division of labor for concurrent carbon recovery and 
pollutant degradation.

Gu J(1), Guo J(1), Peng R(1), Wu Y(2), Long M(1), Zheng X(3), Huang H(1), Chen 
Y(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Water Pollution Control and Green Resource Recycling, 
College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 
200092, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Water Pollution Control and Green Resource Recycling, 
College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 
200092, China. Electronic address: wuyang1026@tongji.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Water Pollution Control and Green Resource Recycling, 
College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 
200092, China; Key Laboratory of Yangtze River Water Environment, College of 
Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, 
China; Shanghai Institute of Pollution Control and Ecological Security, 
Shanghai, 200092, China. Electronic address: xiongzheng@tongji.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Water Pollution Control and Green Resource Recycling, 
College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 
200092, China; Key Laboratory of Yangtze River Water Environment, College of 
Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, 
China.

Electro-fermentation systems (EFS) offer a promising approach for waste 
activated sludge valorization, yet the spatial metabolic interaction between 
electrode biofilms and planktonic suspensions remains unclear. This lack of 
understanding limits the optimization of systems aimed at simultaneous resource 
recovery and pollutant removal. This work investigated the cooperation between 
biofilms and suspensions in EFS designed to synchronize carbon recovery 
(volatile fatty acid, VFAs) production and halogenated contaminant degradation 
(4-bromophenol, 4-BP, as model pollutant). The system demonstrated dual 
advantages, achieving 97.4% removal of 4-BP while increasing VFAs production by 
40.2% compared to the control. Multi-omics analysis revealed a distinct spatial 
division of labor. Electrode biofilms primarily governed reductive debromination 
by enriching electroactive bacteria (e.g., Syntrophomonas and Geobacter) and 
dehalogenators (e.g., Hydrogenophaga). This process was driven by the enrichment 
of genes related to electron transfer and dehalogenation. In contrast, 
planktonic suspensions mainly drove acidogenesis by enriching fermentative 
bacteria (e.g., Sedimentibacter and Petrimonas) and accelerating hydrolysis and 
fatty acid biosynthesis pathways. Partial least squares path modeling identified 
extracellular electron transfer as the key factor reinforcing this 
biofilm-suspension syntrophy, significantly contributing to both dehalogenation 
and acidogenesis. Furthermore, the microbial community activated an integrated 
adaptive network involving sensing, defense, and energy metabolism to protect 
the system from toxicity. This work provides in-depth insight into how biofilms 
and suspensions partition metabolic functions in EFS, clarifying rules that 
coordinate carbon and redox flows for robust sludge valorization and 
detoxification.

Copyright © 2026 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2026.125665
PMID: 41793807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.