1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Jul 20;86(15):e00176-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00176-20.  Print 2020 Jul 20.

Genome-Resolved Metagenomics and Detailed Geochemical Speciation Analyses Yield 
New Insights into Microbial Mercury Cycling in Geothermal Springs.

Gionfriddo CM(1), Stott MB(2), Power JF(2), Ogorek JM(3), Krabbenhoft DP(3), 
Wick R(4), Holt K(4), Chen LX(5), Thomas BC(5), Banfield JF(6)(5)(7), Moreau 
JW(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Earth Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia gionfriddocm@ornl.gov.
(2)GNS Science, Wairakei Research Centre, Taupo, New Zealand.
(3)Wisconsin Water Science Center, U.S. Geological Survey, Middleton, Wisconsin, 
USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Earth and Planetary Science, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, California, 
USA.
(6)School of Earth Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(7)Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management, UC Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California, USA.

Geothermal systems emit substantial amounts of aqueous, gaseous, and methylated 
mercury, but little is known about microbial influences on mercury speciation. 
Here, we report results from genome-resolved metagenomics and mercury speciation 
analysis of acidic warm springs in the Ngawha Geothermal Field (<55°C, pH <4.5), 
Northland Region, Aotearoa New Zealand. Our aim was to identify the 
microorganisms genetically equipped for mercury methylation, demethylation, or 
Hg(II) reduction to volatile Hg(0) in these springs. Dissolved total and 
methylated mercury concentrations in two adjacent springs with different mercury 
speciation ranked among the highest reported from natural sources (250 to 
16,000 ng liter-1 and 0.5 to 13.9 ng liter-1, respectively). Total solid mercury 
concentrations in spring sediments ranged from 1,274 to 7,000 μg g-1 In the 
context of such ultrahigh mercury levels, the geothermal microbiome was 
unexpectedly diverse and dominated by acidophilic and mesophilic sulfur- and 
iron-cycling bacteria, mercury- and arsenic-resistant bacteria, and thermophilic 
and acidophilic archaea. By integrating microbiome structure and metagenomic 
potential with geochemical constraints, we constructed a conceptual model for 
biogeochemical mercury cycling in geothermal springs. The model includes abiotic 
and biotic controls on mercury speciation and illustrates how geothermal mercury 
cycling may couple to microbial community dynamics and sulfur and iron 
biogeochemistry.IMPORTANCE Little is currently known about biogeochemical 
mercury cycling in geothermal systems. The manuscript presents a new conceptual 
model, supported by genome-resolved metagenomic analysis and detailed 
geochemical measurements. The model illustrates environmental factors that 
influence mercury cycling in acidic springs, including transitions between solid 
(mineral) and aqueous phases of mercury, as well as the interconnections among 
mercury, sulfur, and iron cycles. This work provides a framework for studying 
natural geothermal mercury emissions globally. Specifically, our findings have 
implications for mercury speciation in wastewaters from geothermal power plants 
and the potential environmental impacts of microbially and abiotically formed 
mercury species, particularly where they are mobilized in spring waters that mix 
with surface or groundwaters. Furthermore, in the context of thermophilic 
origins for microbial mercury volatilization, this report yields new insights 
into how such processes may have evolved alongside microbial mercury 
methylation/demethylation and the environmental constraints imposed by the 
geochemistry and mineralogy of geothermal systems.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00176-20
PMCID: PMC7376564
PMID: 32414793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]