1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2026 Aug 19;92(8):e0051626. doi: 10.1128/aem.00516-26.
 Epub 2026 Jul 16.

Sedimentation accelerates mixed-substrate conversion during sequential batch 
cultivation of a co-culture of sugar-specialist yeast strains.

Fecker T(1), Rossouw M(1), Pronk JT(1), van Tatenhove-Pel RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, Delft, the 
Netherlands.

Current industrial processes for yeast-based conversion of glucose, xylose, and 
arabinose mixtures in lignocellulosic hydrolysates mostly rely on monocultures 
of generalist strains that consume the sugars sequentially. Co-cultivation of 
"sugar-specialist" strains offers potential advantages regarding volumetric 
productivity and genetic stability of pentose-fermenting strains during 
prolonged operation. However, in these cultures, the slow fermentation of 
pentoses strongly affects the time required for complete sugar conversion. This 
study explores whether the kinetics of such co-cultures can be improved by 
increasing the biomass concentration through selective sedimentation of a 
slow-fermenting strain in sequential batch fermentations. Deletion of ACE2 in a 
diploid, arabinose-specialist Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain yielded a 
multicellular, fast-sedimenting phenotype. In monocultures on 20 g∙L-1 arabinose 
in anaerobic sequential batch bioreactors with a 30-min biomass settling period 
between cultivation cycles, the sedimenting strain showed a shorter time for 
full conversion than its non-sedimenting parental strain (11.5 ± 0.4 h and 16.6 
± 0.4 h, respectively). Co-cultures of a glucose-specialist S. cerevisiae strain 
with the sedimenting arabinose specialist on a glucose-arabinose mixture (10 
g·L-1 of each sugar) showed a 29% shorter batch time than corresponding 
co-cultures with the non-sedimenting arabinose specialist (12.6 ± 0.1 h vs. 17.7 
± 0.1 h). Increasing the biomass settling period to 1 h further reduced the 
batch time to 8.1 ± 0.1 h and resulted in near-simultaneous depletion of both 
sugars. These results show that if selective sedimentation of specific 
slow-fermenting strains can be implemented under relevant process conditions, it 
has the potential to improve microbial conversion of mixed 
substrates.IMPORTANCEFermentation of substrate mixtures from lignocellulosic 
biomass can reduce substrate costs but is often hindered by inefficient, 
sequential consumption of sugars by "sugar-generalist" Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
strains. While co-cultures of "sugar-specialist" S. cerevisiae strains can 
enable parallel consumption in sequential-batch fermentations, the overall 
volumetric productivity is limited by the slowest fermenter. This study presents 
a strategy to overcome this limitation by engineering a slow-fermenting 
arabinose-specialist S. cerevisiae strain for fast sedimentation and 
implementing a short settling phase between batch cycles in sequential-batch 
bioreactors, selectively concentrating the specialist's biomass and improving 
consumption kinetics in subsequent cycles. This approach reduced overall 
fermentation time by 30% in monoculture and enabled near-simultaneous depletion 
of arabinose and glucose in co-culture with a glucose-specialist strain. These 
results show that selective sedimentation of co-culture partners can improve 
fermentation kinetics in sequential-batch cultures. If compatible with 
industrial process conditions, this strategy has the potential to improve the 
economics of co-culture-based fermentations.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.00516-26
PMCID: PMC13488295
PMID: 42461012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.