1. PeerJ. 2020 Jun 30;8:e9464. doi: 10.7717/peerj.9464. eCollection 2020.

Investigation of microbial community interactions between Lake Washington 
methanotrophs using -------genome-scale metabolic modeling.

Islam MM(1), Le T(2), Daggumati SR(1), Saha R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of 
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, 
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The role of methane in global warming has become paramount to the 
environment and the human society, especially in the past few decades. Methane 
cycling microbial communities play an important role in the global methane 
cycle, which is why the characterization of these communities is critical to 
understand and manipulate their behavior. Methanotrophs are a major player in 
these communities and are able to oxidize methane as their primary carbon 
source.
RESULTS: Lake Washington is a freshwater lake characterized by a methane-oxygen 
countergradient that contains a methane cycling microbial community. 
Methanotrophs are a major part of this community involved in assimilating 
methane from lake water. Two significant methanotrophic species in this 
community are Methylobacter and Methylomonas. In this work, these methanotrophs 
are computationally studied via developing highly curated genome-scale metabolic 
models. Each model was then integrated to form a community model with a 
multi-level optimization framework. The competitive and mutualistic metabolic 
interactions among Methylobacter and Methylomonas were also characterized. The 
community model was next tested under carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen limited 
conditions in addition to a nutrient-rich condition to observe the systematic 
shifts in the internal metabolic pathways and extracellular metabolite 
exchanges. Each condition showed variations in the methane oxidation pathway, 
pyruvate metabolism, and the TCA cycle as well as the excretion of formaldehyde 
and carbon di-oxide in the community. Finally, the community model was simulated 
under fixed ratios of these two members to reflect the opposing behavior in the 
two-member synthetic community and in sediment-incubated communities. The 
community simulations predicted a noticeable switch in intracellular carbon 
metabolism and formaldehyde transfer between community members in 
sediment-incubated vs. synthetic condition.
CONCLUSION: In this work, we attempted to predict the response of a simplified 
methane cycling microbial community from Lake Washington to varying environments 
and also provide an insight into the difference of dynamics in 
sediment-incubated microcosm community and synthetic co-cultures. Overall, this 
study lays the ground for in silico systems-level studies of freshwater lake 
ecosystems, which can drive future efforts of understanding, engineering, and 
modifying these communities for dealing with global warming issues.

©2020 Islam et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9464
PMCID: PMC7333651
PMID: 32655999

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.