1. mBio. 2023 Apr 25;14(2):e0318922. doi: 10.1128/mbio.03189-22. Epub 2023 Feb
27.

Cross-Feedings, Competition, and Positive and Negative Synergies in a 
Four-Species Synthetic Community for Anaerobic Degradation of Cellulose to 
Methane.

Wang D(1), Hunt KA(2), Candry P(2), Tao X(1)(3), Wofford NQ(1), Zhou 
J(1)(3)(4)(5)(6), McInerney MJ(1), Stahl DA(2), Tanner RS(1), Zhou A(1)(3), 
Winkler M(2), Pan C(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Plant Biology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, 
Oklahoma, USA.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Institute for Environmental Genomics, University of Oklahoma, Norman, 
Oklahoma, USA.
(4)School of Civil Engineering and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, USA.
(5)Earth and Environmental Sciences, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
Berkeley, California, USA.
(6)School of Computer Science, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, USA.

Complex interactions exist among microorganisms in a community to carry out 
ecological processes and adapt to changing environments. Here, we constructed a 
quad-culture consisting of a cellulolytic bacterium (Ruminiclostridium 
cellulolyticum), a hydrogenotrophic methanogen (Methanospirillum hungatei), an 
acetoclastic methanogen (Methanosaeta concilii), and a sulfate-reducing 
bacterium (Desulfovibrio vulgaris). The four microorganisms in the quad-culture 
cooperated via cross-feeding to produce methane using cellulose as the only 
carbon source and electron donor. The community metabolism of the quad-culture 
was compared with those of the R. cellulolyticum-containing tri-cultures, 
bi-cultures, and mono-culture. Methane production was higher in the quad-culture 
than the sum of the increases in the tri-cultures, which was attributed to a 
positive synergy of four species. In contrast, cellulose degradation by the 
quad-culture was lower than the additive effects of the tri-cultures which 
represented a negative synergy. The community metabolism of the quad-culture was 
compared between a control condition and a treatment condition with sulfate 
addition using metaproteomics and metabolic profiling. Sulfate addition enhanced 
sulfate reduction and decreased methane and CO2 productions. The cross-feeding 
fluxes in the quad-culture in the two conditions were modeled using a community 
stoichiometric model. Sulfate addition strengthened metabolic handoffs from R. 
cellulolyticum to M. concilii and D. vulgaris and intensified substrate 
competition between M. hungatei and D. vulgaris. Overall, this study uncovered 
emergent properties of higher-order microbial interactions using a four-species 
synthetic community. IMPORTANCE A synthetic community was designed using four 
microbial species that together performed distinct key metabolic processes in 
the anaerobic degradation of cellulose to methane and CO2. The microorganisms 
exhibited expected interactions, such as cross-feeding of acetate from a 
cellulolytic bacterium to an acetoclastic methanogen and competition of H2 
between a sulfate reducing bacterium and a hydrogenotrophic methanogen. This 
validated our rational design of the interactions between microorganisms based 
on their metabolic roles. More interestingly, we also found positive and 
negative synergies as emergent properties of high-order microbial interactions 
among three or more microorganisms in cocultures. These microbial interactions 
can be quantitatively measured by adding and removing specific members. A 
community stoichiometric model was constructed to represent the fluxes in the 
community metabolic network. This study paved the way toward a more predictive 
understanding of the impact of environmental perturbations on microbial 
interactions sustaining geochemically significant processes in natural systems.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.03189-22
PMCID: PMC10128006
PMID: 36847519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.