1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Dec 12;9:3059. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.03059.
eCollection  2018.

Weak Iron Oxidation by Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans Maintains a Favorable 
Redox Potential for Chalcopyrite Bioleaching.

Christel S(1), Herold M(2), Bellenberg S(1)(3), Buetti-Dinh A(4)(5), El Hajjami 
M(6), Pivkin IV(4)(5), Sand W(3)(7)(8), Wilmes P(2), Poetsch A(6)(9), Vera 
M(10)(11), Dopson M(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ecology and Evolution in Microbial Model Systems, Linnaeus 
University, Kalmar, Sweden.
(2)Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Belvaux, 
Luxembourg.
(3)Aquatic Biotechnology, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(4)Faculty of Informatics, Institute of Computational Science, Università della 
Svizzera Italiana, Lugano, Switzerland.
(5)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(6)Plant Biochemistry, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(7)College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Donghua University, 
Shanghai, China.
(8)Mining Academy and Technical University Freiberg, Freiberg, Germany.
(9)School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences, Plymouth University, Plymouth, 
United Kingdom.
(10)Schools of Engineering, Medicine and Biological Sciences, Institute for 
Biological and Medical Engineering, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.
(11)Department of Hydraulic and Environmental Engineering, School of 
Engineering, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Bioleaching is an emerging technology, describing the microbially assisted 
dissolution of sulfidic ores that provides a more environmentally friendly 
alternative to many traditional metal extraction methods, such as roasting or 
smelting. Industrial interest is steadily increasing and today, circa 15-20% of 
the world's copper production can be traced back to this method. However, 
bioleaching of the world's most abundant copper mineral chalcopyrite suffers 
from low dissolution rates, often attributed to passivating layers, which need 
to be overcome to use this technology to its full potential. To prevent these 
passivating layers from forming, leaching needs to occur at a low 
oxidation/reduction potential (ORP), but chemical redox control in bioleaching 
heaps is difficult and costly. As an alternative, selected weak iron-oxidizers 
could be employed that are incapable of scavenging exceedingly low 
concentrations of iron and therefore, raise the ORP just above the onset of 
bioleaching, but not high enough to allow for the occurrence of passivation. In 
this study, we report that microbial iron oxidation by Sulfobacillus 
thermosulfidooxidans meets these specifications. Chalcopyrite concentrate 
bioleaching experiments with S. thermosulfidooxidans as the sole iron oxidizer 
exhibited significantly lower redox potentials and higher release of copper 
compared to communities containing the strong iron oxidizer Leptospirillum 
ferriphilum. Transcriptomic response to single and co-culture of these two iron 
oxidizers was studied and revealed a greatly decreased number of mRNA 
transcripts ascribed to iron oxidation in S. thermosulfidooxidans when cultured 
in the presence of L. ferriphilum. This allowed for the identification of genes 
potentially responsible for S. thermosulfidooxidans' weaker iron oxidation to be 
studied in the future, as well as underlined the need for new mechanisms to 
control the microbial population in bioleaching heaps.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.03059
PMCID: PMC6315122
PMID: 30631311