1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 7;106(14):5859-64. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0901529106. Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Characterizing a model human gut microbiota composed of members of its two 
dominant bacterial phyla.

Mahowald MA(1), Rey FE, Seedorf H, Turnbaugh PJ, Fulton RS, Wollam A, Shah N, 
Wang C, Magrini V, Wilson RK, Cantarel BL, Coutinho PM, Henrissat B, Crock LW, 
Russell A, Verberkmoes NC, Hettich RL, Gordon JI.

Author information:
(1)Center for Genome Sciences and Genome Sequencing Center, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63108, USA.

The adult human distal gut microbial community is typically dominated by 2 
bacterial phyla (divisions), the Firmicutes and the Bacteroidetes. Little is 
known about the factors that govern the interactions between their members. 
Here, we examine the niches of representatives of both phyla in vivo. Finished 
genome sequences were generated from Eubacterium rectale and E. eligens, which 
belong to Clostridium Cluster XIVa, one of the most common gut Firmicute clades. 
Comparison of these and 25 other gut Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes indicated that 
the Firmicutes possess smaller genomes and a disproportionately smaller number 
of glycan-degrading enzymes. Germ-free mice were then colonized with E. rectale 
and/or a prominent human gut Bacteroidetes, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, 
followed by whole-genome transcriptional profiling, high-resolution proteomic 
analysis, and biochemical assays of microbial-microbial and microbial-host 
interactions. B. thetaiotaomicron adapts to E. rectale by up-regulating 
expression of a variety of polysaccharide utilization loci encoding numerous 
glycoside hydrolases, and by signaling the host to produce mucosal glycans that 
it, but not E. rectale, can access. E. rectale adapts to B. thetaiotaomicron by 
decreasing production of its glycan-degrading enzymes, increasing expression of 
selected amino acid and sugar transporters, and facilitating glycolysis by 
reducing levels of NADH, in part via generation of butyrate from acetate, which 
in turn is used by the gut epithelium. This simplified model of the human gut 
microbiota illustrates niche specialization and functional redundancy within 
members of its major bacterial phyla, and the importance of host glycans as a 
nutrient foundation that ensures ecosystem stability.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0901529106
PMCID: PMC2660063
PMID: 19321416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.