1. AMB Express. 2015 Dec;5(1):124. doi: 10.1186/s13568-015-0124-5. Epub 2015 Jun 
11.

Metabarcoding of the kombucha microbial community grown in different 
microenvironments.

Reva ON(1), Zaets IE, Ovcharenko LP, Kukharenko OE, Shpylova SP, Podolich OV, de 
Vera JP, Kozyrovska NO.

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Unit, Department of Biochemistry, 
University of Pretoria, Lynnwood road, Hillcrest, Pretoria, 0002, South Africa, 
oleg.reva@up.ac.za.

Introducing of the DNA metabarcoding analysis of probiotic microbial communities 
allowed getting insight into their functioning and establishing a better control 
on safety and efficacy of the probiotic communities. In this work the kombucha 
poly-microbial probiotic community was analysed to study its flexibility under 
different growth conditions. Environmental DNA sequencing revealed a complex and 
flexible composition of the kombucha microbial culture (KMC) constituting more 
bacterial and fungal organisms in addition to those found by cultural method. 
The community comprised bacterial and yeast components including cultured and 
uncultivable microorganisms. Culturing the KMC under different conditions 
revealed the core part of the community which included acetobacteria of two 
genera Komagataeibacter (former Gluconacetobacter) and Gluconobacter, and 
representatives of several yeast genera among which Brettanomyces/Dekkera and 
Pichia (including former Issatchenkia) were dominant. Herbaspirillum spp. and 
Halomonas spp., which previously had not been described in KMC, were found to be 
minor but permanent members of the community. The community composition was 
dependent on the growth conditions. The bacterial component of KMC was 
relatively stable, but may include additional member-lactobacilli. The yeast 
species composition was significantly variable. High-throughput sequencing 
showed complexity and variability of KMC that may affect the quality of the 
probiotic drink. It was hypothesized that the kombucha core community might 
recruit some environmental bacteria, particularly lactobacilli, which 
potentially may contribute to the fermentative capacity of the probiotic drink. 
As many KMC-associated microorganisms cannot be cultured out of the community, a 
robust control for community composition should be provided by using DNA 
metabarcoding.

DOI: 10.1186/s13568-015-0124-5
PMCID: PMC4467805
PMID: 26061774