1. ISME J. 2026 Aug 27:wrag223. doi: 10.1093/ismejo/wrag223. Online ahead of
print.

Carbon substrate type shapes spatial self-organization in a multi-species
biofilm community.

Zhu D(1), Svagan AJ(2), Yang N(1), Hansen MF(1), Kühl M(3), Burmølle M(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Microbiology, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen 2100, Denmark.
(2)Department of Fibre and Polymer Technology, Royal Institute of Technology
(KTH), SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Marine Biology Section, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen,
Strandpromenaden 5, Helsingør 3000, Denmark.

Spatial organization is a defining feature of multispecies biofilms and
critically influences microbial interactions and emergent community properties.
However, understanding and manipulating how microbes assemble into spatially
structured biofilms remains challenging because most experimental frameworks
emphasize species composition and pairwise interactions, while often overlooking
the spatial constraints on biofilms imposed by the environment. In this study,
we focus on how carbon substrate type, distinguishing between diffusible sugars
and polymeric substrates, affects biofilm self-organization in a four-member
synthetic bacterial community (SynCom). Across all tested conditions, the SynCom
consistently formed more biofilm biomass than any of its subsets, indicating a
robust synergistic phenotype. Using chemically defined, 3D-printed hydrogel
substrates with consistent physical properties, we varied carbon source
composition to identify its impact on biofilm assembly. Microscopic imaging
showed that carbon substrate type strongly influenced biofilm self-organization
with diffusible simple carbon substrates yielding relatively intermixed
communities, whereas polymer-rich carbon substrates promoted a highly structured
biofilm organization characterized by the dominance and peripheral localization
of polymer-degrading species. Bioinformatic analyses of carbohydrate-active
enzyme (CAZyme) repertoires and genome-scale metabolic modeling suggested
bidirectional metabolite exchange among the SynCom members, which was also
supported by analysis of biofilm formation in conditioned community
supernatants. Together, our findings suggest carbon substrate type as an
important ecological determinant of biofilm self-organization, highlighting the
need to integrate environmental factors alongside species composition and
metabolic potential to fully understand and manipulate natural and engineered
multispecies biofilms.

© The Author(s) 2026. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
International Society for Microbial Ecology.

DOI: 10.1093/ismejo/wrag223
PMID: 42658845

Supplementary material excerpts:

Table S1: List of isolated soil strains in the four-species synthetic community (SynCom)

Strain	Abbreviation	Gram	Reference genome from European Nucleotide Archive (ENA)
Stenotrophomonas rhizophila	S	Negative	PRJEB15263
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia*	X	Negative	PRJEB18431
Microbacterium oxydans	M	Positive	PRJEB15265
Paenibacillus amylolyticus	P	Positive	PRJEB15262

* Genome-wide taxonomy analysis by Genome BLAST Distance Phylogeny (GBDP) shows this genome should refer to Stenotrophomonas maltophilia instead of Xanthomonas retroflexus in ENA.

Table S2: List of carbon sources for microbial utilization screening

Carbon source name	Abbrev.	Final Conc.	Carbon source type
D-(+)-Glucose	Glu	10 mM	Monosaccharide
D-(+)-Xylose	Xylose	12 mM	Monosaccharide
D-(+)-Cellobiose	Clbs	5 mM	Disaccharide
Carboxymethyl cellulose	CMC	1.0 wt%	Polysaccharide (cellulose)
Microcrystalline cellulose	Cellulose	1.0 wt%	Polysaccharide (cellulose)
Sodium alginate	Alginate	1.0 wt%	Polysaccharide (alginate)
Xylan (from corncob)	Xylan	1.0 wt%	Polysaccharide (hemicellulose)

Table S3: List of hydrogel-based printing materials

CNF+CMC	1 % cellulose nanofiber mixed with 1 % CMC
CNF+Xylan	1 % cellulose nanofiber mixed with 1 % Xylan
CNF+CMC+Glu	1 % cellulose nanofiber mixed with 1 % CMC and 10 mM Glucose
CNF+CMC+Clbs	1 % cellulose nanofiber mixed with 1 % CMC and 5 mM Cellobiose
CNF+Xylan+Clbs	1 % cellulose nanofiber mixed with 1 % Xylan and 5 mM Cellobiose

Growth curve measurement:

Growth curves of the mono- and quadruple-cultures in M9 supplemented with different carbon sources (Table S2) were measured using a plate reader (Synergy H1, BioTek Instrument, VT, USA) at 24 °C.

Biofilm formation experiments on culture supernatants:

The supernatants of P. amylolyticus (P) and the SynCom were prepared from cultures on different carbon sources in M9 media with cellobiose, cellobiose+xylan, and cellobiose+CMC, respectively.

Fig. S1:

Monoculture versus SynCom (Community PMSX) biofilm formation under static conditions using crystal violet to assess biomass production after 24 hours of growth in different carbon sources. Data points above the line represent the SynCom that are performing better than the sum of monoculture biofilms. P: P. amylolyticus, M: M. oxydans, S: S. rhizophila, and X: S. maltophilia.

Fig. S9:

On the simple substrates (e.g. cellobiose) both curves stay near 1, indicating a well-mixed, unstructured community; while on the polymeric substrates (e.g. CMC, xylan) the non-degrader members show strong short-range co-clustering that decays over tens of micrometers, while P. amylolyticus is enriched at the periphery of those clusters which is consistent with substrate complexity driving spatial self-organization around P. amylolyticus.

Fig. S10:

Each strain (P, M, S, X; responder) was grown on conditioned supernatants prepared from either P. amylolyticus monoculture (P-sup) or the SynCom community (PMSX-sup) on three carbon sources (cellobiose (Clbs), Clbs+xylan, Clbs+CMC), and biofilm biomass was quantified by the CV assay at 24 h (solid line) and 48 h (dashed line).

For each SynCom member, biofilm formation in PMSX-conditioned supernatants exceeded that in P-conditioned supernatants in the majority of conditions. P: P. amylolyticus, M: M. oxydans, S: S. rhizophila, and X: S. maltophilia.
