1. J Hazard Mater. 2024 Mar 15;466:133504. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.133504.
Epub  2024 Jan 11.

Role of indigenous microbial communities in the mobilization of potentially 
toxic elements and rare-earth elements from alkaline mine waste.

Cebekhulu S(1), Gómez-Arias A(2), Matu A(3), Alom J(3), Valverde A(4), Caraballo 
MA(5), Ololade O(1), Schneider P(6), Castillo J(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Environmental Management, University of the Free State, 
Bloemfontein, Republic of South Africa.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, Republic 
of South Africa.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Biochemistry, University of the Free State, 
Bloemfontein, Republic of South Africa.
(4)Instituto de Recursos Naturales y Agrobiologıa de Salamanca (IRNASA, CSIC), 
Salamanca, Spain.
(5)Department of Mining, Mechanic, Energetic and Construction Engineering, 
Higher Technical School of Engineering, University of Huelva, Huelva, Spain; 
Department of Water, Mining and Environment, Scientific and Technological Center 
of Huelva, University of Huelva, Huelva, Spain.
(6)Department for Water, Environment, Civil Engineering and Safety, University 
of Applied Sciences Magdeburg-Stendal, Magdeburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Biochemistry, University of the Free State, 
Bloemfontein, Republic of South Africa. Electronic address: 
CastilloHernandezJ@ufs.ac.za.

This study aims to evaluate the role of indigenous microorganisms in the 
mobilization of potentially toxic elements (PTE) and rare-earth elements (REE), 
the influence of the bioavailability of carbon sources that might boost 
microbial leaching, and the generation of neutral/alkaline mine drainage from 
alkaline tailings. These tailings, with significant concentrations of total 
organic carbon (TOC), were mainly colonized by bacteria belonging to the genera 
Sphingomonas, Novosphingobium and Solirubrobacter, and fungi of the genera 
Alternaria, Sarocladium and Aspergillus. Functionality analysis suggests the 
capability of these microorganisms to leach PTE and REE. Bio-/leaching tests 
confirmed the generation of neutral mine drainage, the influence of organic 
substrate, and the leaching of higher concentrations of PTE and REE due to the 
production of organic acids and siderophores by indigenous microorganisms. In 
addition, this study offers some insights into a sustainable alternative for 
reprocessing PMC alkaline tailings to recover REE.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.133504
PMID: 38310848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.