1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2021 Apr 9;19:1917-1927. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.03.034. eCollection 2021.

Formation, characterization and modeling of emergent synthetic microbial 
communities.

Wang J(1), Carper DL(1), Burdick LH(1), Shrestha HK(1)(2), Appidi MR(1)(2), 
Abraham PE(1), Timm CM(1), Hettich RL(1), Pelletier DA(1), Doktycz MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Biosciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA.
(2)Graduate School of Genome Science and Technology, University of Tennessee, 
Knoxville, TN, USA.

Microbial communities colonize plant tissues and contribute to host function. 
How these communities form and how individual members contribute to shaping the 
microbial community are not well understood. Synthetic microbial communities, 
where defined individual isolates are combined, can serve as valuable model 
systems for uncovering the organizational principles of communities. Using 
genome-defined organisms, systematic analysis by computationally-based network 
reconstruction can lead to mechanistic insights and the metabolic interactions 
between species. In this study, 10 bacterial strains isolated from the Populus 
deltoides rhizosphere were combined and passaged in two different media 
environments to form stable microbial communities. The membership and relative 
abundances of the strains stabilized after around 5 growth cycles and resulted 
in just a few dominant strains that depended on the medium. To unravel the 
underlying metabolic interactions, flux balance analysis was used to model 
microbial growth and identify potential metabolic exchanges involved in shaping 
the microbial communities. These analyses were complemented by growth curves of 
the individual isolates, pairwise interaction screens, and metaproteomics of the 
community. A fast growth rate is identified as one factor that can provide an 
advantage for maintaining presence in the community. Final community selection 
can also depend on selective antagonistic relationships and metabolic exchanges. 
Revealing the mechanisms of interaction among plant-associated microorganisms 
provides insights into strategies for engineering microbial communities that can 
potentially increase plant growth and disease resistance. Further, deciphering 
the membership and metabolic potentials of a bacterial community will enable the 
design of synthetic communities with desired biological functions.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Research Network of 
Computational and Structural Biotechnology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.03.034
PMCID: PMC8079826
PMID: 33995895

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.