1. ISME J. 2025 Jan 2;19(1):wraf142. doi: 10.1093/ismejo/wraf142.

Model cyanobacterial consortia reveal a consistent core microbiome independent 
of inoculation source or cyanobacterial host species.

Kust A(1)(2), Zorz J(1)(2), Paniker CC(2)(3), Bouma-Gregson K(1)(4), Krishnappa 
N(2), Liu W(1), Banfield JF(1)(2)(5)(6), Diamond S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, United States.
(2)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, 
United States.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, SW72AZ, United 
Kingdom.
(4)U.S. Geological Survey, California Water Science Center, Sacramento, CA 
95819, United States.
(5)Department of Environmental Science, Policy and Management, University of 
California, Berkeley, CA 94720, United States.
(6)School of Geography, Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, The University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3053, Australia.

Cyanobacteria are integral to biogeochemical cycles, influence climate 
processes, and hold promise for commercial applications. In natural habitats, 
they form complex consortia with other microorganisms, where interspecies 
interactions shape their ecological roles. Although in vitro studies of these 
consortia have significantly advanced our understanding, they often lack the 
biological replication needed for robust statistical analysis of shared 
microbiome features and functions. Moreover, the microbiomes of many model 
cyanobacterial strains, which are central to our understanding of cyanobacterial 
biology, remain poorly characterized. Here, we expanded on existing in vitro 
approaches by coculturing five well-characterized model cyanobacterial strains 
with microorganisms filtered from three distinct freshwater sources, generating 
108 stable consortia. Metagenomic analyses revealed that, despite host and 
inoculum diversity, these consortia converged on a similar set of 
noncyanobacterial taxa, forming a 25-species core microbiome. The large number 
of stable consortia in this study enabled statistical validation of both 
previously observed and newly identified core microbiome functionalities in 
micronutrient biosynthesis, metabolite transport, and anoxygenic photosynthesis. 
Furthermore, core species showed significant enrichment of plasmids, and 
functions encoded on plasmids suggested plasmid-mediated roles in symbiotic 
interactions. Overall, our findings uncover the potential microbiomes recruited 
by key model cyanobacteria, demonstrate that laboratory-enriched consortia 
retain many taxonomic and functional traits observed more broadly in 
phototroph-heterotroph assemblages, and show that model cyanobacteria can serve 
as robust hosts for uncovering functional roles underlying cyanobacterial 
community dynamics.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
International Society for Microbial Ecology.

DOI: 10.1093/ismejo/wraf142
PMCID: PMC12368963
PMID: 40626910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no competing or conflict of 
interest with respect to the work performed in this study.