1. Mycorrhiza. 2026 Aug 28;36(5):62. doi: 10.1007/s00572-026-01304-0.

Influence of plant cover on the long-term dynamics of an arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungal SynCom in a semi-arid Mediterranean environment.

Cornejo P(1)(2), Ferrol N(3), Barea JM(3), Franco-Correa M(4), García C(5),
Cabeza R(6), Azcón-Aguilar C(7).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Estudios Avanzados en Fruticultura (CEAF), Rengo, 2940000, Chile.
pcornejo@ceaf.cl.
(2)Centro Tecnológico de Suelos y Cultivos (CTSyC), Facultad de Ciencias
Agrarias, Universidad de Talca, Talca, 3460000, Chile. pcornejo@ceaf.cl.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología del Suelo y Sistemas Simbióticos, Estación
Experimental del Zaidín, CSIC, Profesor Albareda 1, Granada, 18008, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Pontificia Universidad
Javeriana, Bogotá, 110231, Colombia.
(5)Centro Regional de Investigación e Innovación para la Sostenibilidad de la
Agricultura y los Territorios Rurales (CERES), Pontificia Universidad Católica
de Valparaíso, Quillota, 2260000, Chile.
(6)Centro Tecnológico de Suelos y Cultivos (CTSyC), Facultad de Ciencias
Agrarias, Universidad de Talca, Talca, 3460000, Chile.
(7)Departamento de Microbiología del Suelo y Sistemas Simbióticos, Estación
Experimental del Zaidín, CSIC, Profesor Albareda 1, Granada, 18008, Spain.
concepcion.azcon@eez.csic.es.

The influence of the plant cover on the composition of an arbuscular mycorrhizal
(AM) fungal synthetic community (SynCom) was studied in a time-course
experiment. A mesocosm system was designed to mimic the environmental conditions
of a semi-arid Mediterranean ecosystem, allowing the assessment of changes in AM
fungal establishment, persistence, and sporulation within the SynCom. The
mesocosm system included soil, AM fungi and plant species characteristic of the
target region from Southern Spain. Retama sphaerocarpa, Lavandula latifolia,
Thymus mastichina and Rosmarinus officinalis were selected and cultivated either
in monoculture or in pairwise combinations, covering all possible dual
associations. The initial AM SynCom was composed of six species (Rhizophagus
clarus, Septoglomus constrictum, Funneliformis coronatum, R. intraradices, F.
mosseae and S. viscosum), all isolated from southern Spain. Changes in the AM
SynCom, both colonizing plant roots and the spores in the rhizosphere, were
monitored every three months over three years. Fungi colonizing roots were
identified through nested PCR-TTGE of the SSU rDNA, while AM fungal spores were
quantified based on morphotype. Results indicate that plant species composition
exerted only a limited influence on the AM fungal community structure, whereas
pronounced species-specific differences in establishment, persistence, and
sporulation shaped community trajectories over time. Septoglomus constrictum
showed increasing spore abundance and specific density across all plant cover
types, while other species (R. clarus, F. coronatum) became undetectable in the
spore pool or maintained a low spore density (F. mosseae, S. viscosum).
Qualitative root-detection patterns were generally consistent with rhizospheric
sporulation trends, although the pooled PCR-TTGE approach did not allow
quantitative comparison between intraradical occurrence and spore abundance.
Overall, these results suggest that S. constrictum showed the most consistent
persistence and sporulation under semi-arid Mediterranean conditions,
identifying it as a candidate for further validation in AM fungal consortia
intended for semi-arid Mediterranean environments, particularly for further
testing in restoration-oriented applications under increasing aridity.

© 2026. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00572-026-01304-0
PMID: 42661004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors
declare no competing interests. Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted
technologies in the manuscript preparation process: During the preparation of
this work and the revisions the authors used ChatGPT (OpenAI) to assist with
language editing, grammar, clarity, and readability of the text. No AI tools
were used to generate, analyze, or interpret scientific data, nor to produce
original scientific content, results, or conclusions. After using this tool, the
authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility
for the content of the published article.
