1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 21;12:747541. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.747541. 
eCollection 2021.

Modulating Drought Stress Response of Maize by a Synthetic Bacterial Community.

Armanhi JSL(1)(2), de Souza RSC(1)(2), Biazotti BB(1)(2)(3), Yassitepe 
JECT(2)(4), Arruda P(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Universidade Estadual de 
Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil.
(2)Genomics for Climate Change Research Center (GCCRC), Universidade Estadual de 
Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Genética e Evolução, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade 
Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil.
(4)Embrapa Informática Agropecuária, Campinas, Brazil.

Plant perception and responses to environmental stresses are known to encompass 
a complex set of mechanisms in which the microbiome is involved. Knowledge about 
plant physiological responses is therefore critical for understanding the 
contribution of the microbiome to plant resilience. However, as plant growth is 
a dynamic process, a major hurdle is to find appropriate tools to effectively 
measure temporal variations of different plant physiological parameters. Here, 
we used a non-invasive real-time phenotyping platform in a one-to-one 
(plant-sensors) set up to investigate the impact of a synthetic community 
(SynCom) harboring plant-beneficial bacteria on the physiology and response of 
three commercial maize hybrids to drought stress (DS). SynCom inoculation 
significantly reduced yield loss and modulated vital physiological traits. 
SynCom-inoculated plants displayed lower leaf temperature, reduced turgor loss 
under severe DS and a faster recovery upon rehydration, likely as a result of 
sap flow modulation and better water usage. Microbiome profiling revealed that 
SynCom bacterial members were able to robustly colonize mature plants and 
recruit soil/seed-borne beneficial microbes. The high-resolution temporal data 
allowed us to record instant plant responses to daily environmental 
fluctuations, thus revealing the impact of the microbiome in modulating maize 
physiology, resilience to drought, and crop productivity.

Copyright © 2021 Armanhi, de Souza, Biazotti, Yassitepe and Arruda.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.747541
PMCID: PMC8566980
PMID: 34745050

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.