1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Jun 18;116(25):12558-12565. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1820691116. Epub 2019 May 31.

Plant-derived coumarins shape the composition of an Arabidopsis synthetic root 
microbiome.

Voges MJEEE(1)(2), Bai Y(3), Schulze-Lefert P(3)(4), Sattely ES(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305.
(3)Department of Plant Microbe Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Plant 
Breeding Research, 50829 Cologne, Germany.
(4)Cluster of Excellence on Plant Sciences, Max Planck Institute for Plant 
Breeding Research, 50829 Cologne, Germany.
(5)Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; 
sattely@stanford.edu.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305.

The factors that contribute to the composition of the root microbiome and, in 
turn, affect plant fitness are not well understood. Recent work has highlighted 
a major contribution of the soil inoculum in determining the composition of the 
root microbiome. However, plants are known to conditionally exude a diverse 
array of unique secondary metabolites, that vary among species and environmental 
conditions and can interact with the surrounding biota. Here, we explore the 
role of specialized metabolites in dictating which bacteria reside in the 
rhizosphere. We employed a reduced synthetic community (SynCom) of Arabidopsis 
thaliana root-isolated bacteria to detect community shifts that occur in the 
absence of the secreted small-molecule phytoalexins, flavonoids, and coumarins. 
We find that lack of coumarin biosynthesis in f6'h1 mutant plant lines causes a 
shift in the root microbial community specifically under iron deficiency. We 
demonstrate a potential role for iron-mobilizing coumarins in sculpting the A. 
thaliana root bacterial community by inhibiting the proliferation of a 
relatively abundant Pseudomonas species via a redox-mediated mechanism. This 
work establishes a systematic approach enabling elucidation of specific 
mechanisms by which plant-derived molecules mediate microbial community 
composition. Our findings expand on the function of conditionally exuded 
specialized metabolites and suggest avenues to effectively engineer the 
rhizosphere with the aim of improving crop growth in iron-limited alkaline 
soils, which make up a third of the world's arable soils.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1820691116
PMCID: PMC6589675
PMID: 31152139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

===== OPEN-ACCESS FULL TEXT (local file PMC6589675.html) =====

Plant-derived coumarins shape the composition of an Arabidopsis synthetic root microbiome - PMC

 Skip to main content

 An official website of the United States government

 Here's how you know 

 Here's how you know 

 Official websites use .gov 

 A
 .gov website belongs to an official
 government organization in the United States.

 Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 

 A lock (

 Lock 

 Locked padlock icon

 ) or https:// means you've safely
 connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
 information only on official, secure websites.

 Search

 Log in 

 Dashboard

 Publications

 Account settings

 Log out

 Search…

 Search NCBI

 Primary site navigation

 Search

 Logged in as:

 Dashboard

 Publications

 Account settings

 Log in

 Search PMC Full-Text Archive 

 Search in PMC 

 Journal List

 User Guide

 PERMALINK 

 Copy 

 As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
 the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.
 Learn more:
 PMC Disclaimer 
 |

 PMC Copyright Notice

 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2019 May 31;116(25):12558–12565. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1820691116 

 Search in PMC 
 Search in PubMed 
 View in NLM Catalog 
 Add to search 

 Plant-derived coumarins shape the composition of an Arabidopsis synthetic root microbiome 
 Mathias J E E E Voges 
 Mathias J E E E Voges 

aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; 

bDepartment of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; 
 Find articles by Mathias J E E E Voges 

a,b, Yang Bai 
 Yang Bai 

cDepartment of Plant Microbe Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, 50829 Cologne, Germany; 
 Find articles by Yang Bai 

c,1,2,3, Paul Schulze-Lefert 
 Paul Schulze-Lefert 

cDepartment of Plant Microbe Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, 50829 Cologne, Germany; 

dCluster of Excellence on Plant Sciences, Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, 50829 Cologne, Germany; 
 Find articles by Paul Schulze-Lefert 

c,d, Elizabeth S Sattely 
 Elizabeth S Sattely 

aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; 

eHoward Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 
 Find articles by Elizabeth S Sattely 

a,e,4

 Author information 
 Article notes 
 Copyright and License information 

aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; 

bDepartment of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; 

cDepartment of Plant Microbe Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, 50829 Cologne, Germany; 

dCluster of Excellence on Plant Sciences, Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, 50829 Cologne, Germany; 

eHoward Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 

4 To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: sattely@stanford.edu . 

 Edited by Jeffery L. Dangl, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, and approved May 7, 2019 (received for review December 4, 2018) 
 Author contributions: M.J.E.E.E.V., Y.B., P.S.-L., and E.S.S. designed research; M.J.E.E.E.V. performed research; Y.B. and P.S.-L. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; M.J.E.E.E.V., Y.B., P.S.-L., and E.S.S. analyzed data; and M.J.E.E.E.V. wrote the paper with assistance from P.S.-L. and E.S.S. 
 1Present address: State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Innovative Academy of Seed Design, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100101 Beijing, China. 
 2Present address: CAS-JIC Centre of Excellence for Plant and Microbial Sciences, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100101 Beijing, China. 
 3Present address: College of Advanced Agricultural Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100039 Beijing, China. 

 Series information 
 PNAS Plus Issue date 2019 Jun 18. 

 Published under the PNAS license . 
 PMC Copyright notice 

 PMCID: PMC6589675  PMID: 31152139 

 Significance 
 The root microbiome composition is largely determined by the soil inoculum, with a distinct contribution from the host. The molecular mechanisms with which the host influences its rhizobiome are only beginning to be discovered. Using a hydroponics-based synthetic community approach, we probe how root-exuded specialized metabolites sculpt the root microbiome. We uncover a role for coumarins in structuring the rhizobiome, particularly by limiting the growth of a Pseudomonas strain, for which we propose a mechanism of action involving reactive oxygen species. Our findings support the possibility that root-exuded coumarins form a part of the plant’s adaptive response to iron deficiency that goes beyond iron mobilization to modulate the rhizobiome, and highlight avenues toward engineering the rhizosphere for plant health. 
 Keywords: plant microbiome, coumarins, synthetic communities, plant specialized metabolism Abstract 
 The factors that contribute to the composition of the root microbiome and, in turn, affect plant fitness are not well understood. Recent work has highlighted a major contribution of the soil inoculum in determining the composition of the root microbiome. However, plants are known to conditionally exude a diverse array of unique secondary metabolites, that vary among species and environmental conditions and can interact with the surrounding biota. Here, we explore the role of specialized metabolites in dictating which bacteria reside in the rhizosphere. We employed a reduced synthetic community (SynCom) of Arabidopsis thaliana root-isolated bacteria to detect community shifts that occur in the absence of the secreted small-molecule phytoalexins, flavonoids, and coumarins. We find that lack of coumarin biosynthesis in f6 ′ h1 mutant plant lines causes a shift in the root microbial community specifically under iron deficiency. We demonstrate a potential role for iron-mobilizing coumarins in sculpting the A. thaliana root bacterial community by inhibiting the proliferation of a relatively abundant Pseudomonas species via a redox-mediated mechanism. This work establishes a systematic approach enabling elucidation of specific mechanisms by which plant-derived molecules mediate microbial community composition. Our findings expand on the function of conditionally exuded specialized metabolites and suggest avenues to effectively engineer the rhizosphere with the aim of improving crop growth in iron-limited alkaline soils, which make up a third of the world’s arable soils. 
 Up to 25% of photosynthetically fixed carbon is deposited by plant roots into the surrounding soil as diverse C-containing compounds, such as sugars, amino acids, organic acids, and larger rhizodeposits ( 1 – 3 ). These root exudates are thought to provide key nutrients and reducing equivalents for the sustenance and proliferation of soil microbes that are able to utilize them, possibly resulting in the enrichment of specific bacterial taxa at the plant root compared with the soil biome ( 4 ). This “rhizosphere effect” has been observed in numerous plant and crop species, most notably in Avena barbata (oat) ( 5 ), Zea mays (maize) ( 6 ), Medicago sativa ( 7 ), and the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana ( 8 ). For example, studies in oat have revealed a positive correlation between the capacity of a microbe to utilize compounds exuded by the oat root and the microbe’s relative abundance at this underground tissue ( 5 ). Root microbial assemblages, in turn, affect the fitness of the plant host in varied ways, including by facilitating access to key nutrients ( 9 ) and biocontrol activity ( 10 ). 
 Besides excretion of primary metabolites and carbon-rich sugars, we and others have observed that plants conditionally exude a diverse range of unique secondary metabolites ( 11 – 13 ). A number of these molecules have established roles in plant nutrient acquisition and abiotic stress tolerance. For example, in iron-limiting stress conditions, many plants exude small redox-active molecules involved in mobilizing iron via chelation and subsequent reduction, such as the iron-mobilizing coumarins esculetin, fraxetin, and sideretin in A. thaliana ( 12 , 14 ). Less is understood about how secreted plant molecules might mediate cross-kingdom interactions. However, lead examples demonstrate the potential for secreted plant metabolites to modulate the abundance and even the function of specific soil microbiota that, in turn, disadvantage or benefit growth and development of the host plant ( 15 , 16 ). For example, certain flavonoids exuded by Glycine max and M. sativa initiate a cascade of molecular events in nitrogen-fixing rhizobia that result in the development of root nodules for bacterial accommodation that ultimately benefit both the plant and microbe ( 17 , 18 ). In the well-studied Brassicaceae plant family, sulfur-containing phytoalexins limit the growth of pathogenic fungi and conditionally beneficial fungal endophytes, resulting in enhanced plant survival and fitness ( 13 , 19 ). Despite the important contribution of secondary metabolites to host fitness in ecological and environmental extremes, such as fending off pathogens or nutrient acquisition, their impact on the structure of the commensal bacterial assemblage associated with plant roots remains poorly understood. 
 Establishing causal links between plant metabolites and microbial community composition remains challenging. One technical issue experimentalists face is the difficulty in tracking bacterial strains by 16S rRNA gene surveys in diverse environments, such as soils. In addition, using genetic disruption in the plant host can have pleiotropic effects on plant metabolism, and thus microbial community composition. For example, in a seminal study employing A. thaliana , the hormone salicylic acid (SA) was shown to affect the root microbiome profile of plants grown in soils or a gnotobiotic system by employing defense phytohormone mutant lines ( 20 ). However, the use of phytohormone mutant lines could have indirect effects on the plant’s metabolism, resulting in root microbiome shifts with unexplained causes. Similarly, a recent study presented a possible role for scopoletin in root microbiome assembly ( 11 ). This study was limited to describing differential abundances at the operational taxonomic unit (OTU) level (>97% similarity of 16S rRNA), and was thus unable to draw a mechanistic link between exudation of the metabolite of interest and a known root-colonizing bacterial isolate. 
 Here, we use a synthetic community (SynCom) composed of A. thaliana root-derived bacterial commensals to analyze whether A. thaliana root-secreted specialized metabolites modulate community composition. The SynCom was designed using strains that ( i ) span the range of taxonomic diversity found at the A. thaliana root, ( ii ) can be individually tracked by 16S rRNA gene amplicon analysis, and ( iii ) proliferate in nutrient-rich media ( 21 ). This SynCom was used to colonize the roots of both wild-type and biosynthetic mutant plants with genetic disruptions in several major branches of specialized metabolism that result in metabolites that are conditionally secreted from roots and known to contribute to plant fitness under various conditions ( 22 ). Specifically, we tested mutant plants deficient in flavonoids ( tt5 ) ( 23 ), tryptophan-derived defense metabolites ( cyp79Bb2/b3 ) ( 24 ), methionine-derived defense metabolites ( myb28 ) ( 25 ), and coumarins ( f6 ′ h1 ) ( 12 ). To overcome issues arising from the heterogeneity of soils and soil substitutes, a hydroponic growth setup was employed. Among several changes in the abundance of specific community members, we find that a Pseudomonas sp. isolate is consistently affected by catecholic coumarins and propose a molecular mechanism of action involving reactive oxygen species (ROS). Taken together, these data showcase a systematic approach to investigate the effect of root-exuded specialized metabolites on the rhizobiome, and reveal a role for conditionally exuded coumarins in sculpting a SynCom at the A. thaliana root. 
 Results 
 A Distinct Root Microbiome Profile Is Observed for A. thaliana Using a Hydroponics-Based Gnotobiotic Setup. 
 A hydroponics-based method developed previously ( 12 ) to characterize A. thaliana root exudates was used to probe the effects of root-specialized metabolites on microbial communities ( Fig. 1 A ). We designed a 22-member SynCom from A. thaliana root endophyte isolates collected from loamy soil in Cologne ( 21 ) ( SI Appendix , Table S1 ). Members of our SynCom span a wide range of the diversity found in the A. thaliana root microbiota in terms of family-level taxonomy ( 26 , 27 ) and were selected such that each can be uniquely identified by 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing ( Materials and Methods and SI Appendix , Fig. S1 ). 
 Fig. 1. 

 Open in a new tab 
 The gnotobiotic platform used to investigate the effect of plant specialized metabolism on root microbiome composition. ( A ) The media surrounding hydroponically grown 13-d-old A. thaliana seedlings was inoculated with a 22-member SynCom (the composition and properties of the SynCom are shown in SI Appendix , Fig. S1 and Table S1 ). The microbial community profile at the 20-d-old root was assessed by 16S rRNA along with the starting inoculum. ( B ) Scatter plot with averages of prominent SynCom members’ abundance at the root relative to the starting inoculum as determined by 16S rRNA amplicon count profiling (for strains with reads consistently above two counts after rarefaction as in SI Appendix , Fig. S2 ). Isolates are phylogenetically sorted. Abundances were calculated from 16S rRNA read counts (rarefied to 30,000 reads) of five independent experiments (indicated by the symbol shape). Each data point represents pooled root tissue harvested from two sample wells, each with 16 seeds planted. Values >0.1 suggest an enrichment of that isolate at the root, as a >10-fold increase in colony-forming units is observed in planted media at the time of harvest ( SI Appendix , Fig. S2 A ). Only SynCom members for which 16S rRNA reads were consistently retrieved from the inoculum and root are shown ( SI Appendix , Fig. S2 B ). In one experiment, Sphingopyxis sp. Root1497 did not colonize the root, while Streptomyces sp. Root1310 did (indicated with asterisks). Bacterial phyla are indicated in accordance with the legend in A . A root-mediated shift in community composition (in comparison to the inoculum composition) could be detected in the hydroponics setup using the SynCom ( Fig. 1 B ). The growth media surrounding 13-d-old axenically grown seedlings were inoculated to a final composite OD600 of 0.005–0.01. After a further 7–8 d of growth, a 101- to 102-fold increase in total microbial abundance in the hydroponic media was observed, as determined by colony-forming units compared with the starting inoculum and unplanted controls ( SI Appendix , Fig. S2 ). The 16S rRNA gene profiling revealed differential relative abundances between SynCom members in the root compared with the starting inoculum. Furthermore, strains that poorly colonized the A. thaliana root in monoassociation studies were similarly present at low relative abundances following analysis of 16S rRNA amplicon sequences ( SI Appendix , Fig. S3 ). We observed variability in root colonization by some members between experimental batches with independently cultured and assembled SynComs. This was particularly the case for the strains Sphingopyxis sp. Root1497, Microbacterium sp. Root166, and Streptomyces sp. Root1310. Notably, the Proteobacteria, such as Rhizobium sp. Root149, Pseudomonas sp. Root329, and Sinorhizobium sp. Root1312, were consistently enriched at the root, while many Actinobacteria and Firmicutes isolates were not ( Fig. 1 B and SI Appendix , Fig. S2 ). That Proteobacteria are among the strains most abundant at the Arabidopsis root is consistent with community composition analyses of plants grown in natural soils and artificial soil substrates ( 21 , 26 , 27 ). However, we cannot exclude the possibility that Firmicutes and some Actinobacteria grow poorly in the plant growth media used ( SI Appendix , Fig. S3 ). Strain Abundances at the Roots of Arabidopsis Mutants Deficient in Specialized Metabolite Biosynthesis. 
 Indole- and methionine-derived defense metabolites, flavonoids, and coumarins ( Fig. 2 A ) have previously been identified in A. thaliana root exudates and found to vary across ecotypes and species ( 12 , 16 ). These studies suggest that molecules derived from these branches of specialized metabolism may play a role in the local adaptation of the plant to the soil environment and microbial ecology. Furthermore, transcriptomics of the A. thaliana root colonized by commensal bacteria revealed up-regulation of genes involved in the biosynthesis of these four branches of specialized metabolism ( 28 ). To investigate these specialized metabolites’ role in shaping the root microbiome, the SynCom composition across A. thaliana lines with mutations in pathway genes required for metabolite biosynthesis was determined. We tested plant lines disrupted for cytochrome P450 79B2 (CYP79B2) and cytochrome P450 79B3 (CYP79B3), known to initiate the indole glucosinolate and camalexin biosynthetic pathways ( 24 ); MYB28, the positive transcriptional regulator of aliphatic glucosinolates ( 25 ); chalcone isomerase ( tt5 ), the committed step toward flavonoid biosynthesis ( 23 ); and feruloyl-coenzyme A ortho-hydroxylase 1 (F6′H1), the committed step toward oxidized coumarin biosynthesis ( 14 ) ( Fig. 2 A ). We employed analysis of similarity (ANOSIM) on Bray–Curtis dissimilarity matrices to assess significance of community composition shifts across mutant genotypes. Overall, no significant changes in the microbial composition of cyp79b2/b3 , tt5 , myb28 , or f6 ′ h1 compared with wild type in replete conditions were observed (here defined as P < 0.01 in ANOSIM). This finding is visually depicted in the degree of sample overlap in nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) ordination plots ( SI Appendix , Figs. S4 and S5 ). To determine strain-level variation, we examined the abundance of individual isolates using Z scores. Here, the Z score was defined as the difference between 16S rRNA amplicon read counts for strains from the roots of mutant lines in each sample and the mean of corresponding strains from synchronously grown wild-type roots, normalized to the SD of read counts from wild-type root isolates (Z = ( x i_mutant − μi_WT)/σi_WT). This analysis revealed a significant decrease in the relative abundance of Achromobacter sp. Root170 in cyp79b2/b3 and an increase of Acidovorax sp. Root70 in myb28 in replete growth conditions ( Fig. 2 B ; more details on Z-score calculations are provided in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods ). 
 Fig. 2. 

 Open in a new tab 
 Root microbial community composition across A. thaliana gene disruption lines deficient in major specialized metabolites. ( A ) Schematic of A. thaliana metabolism highlighting major pathways toward root-exuded specialized metabolites. Molecular structures representative of specialized metabolism are shown; these are camalexin ( Top ), kaempferol ( Middle ), and sideretin ( Bottom ). The genes investigated are indicated by different colors, with the designation used for corresponding gene disruption lines given in parentheses (the plant lines used are shown in SI Appendix , Table S2 ). ( B ) Scatter plot of strain Z scores comparing each plant genotype with wild type in replete conditions. Here, the strain Z score was defined as the difference between read counts for strains from the roots of mutant lines in each sample ( x i_mutant) and corresponding mean of strains from synchronously grown wild-type roots ( μ i_WT) in replete media, normalized to the SD of read counts for the strain ( σ i_WT) at the wild-type root (Z = ( x i_mutant − μi_WT)/σi_WT). Asterisks indicate strains that significantly differ for that genotype. Strains are sorted based on phylogeny. Black dashed lines convey Z scores corresponding to P = 0.01 and the mean is given by black bars. Z scores were calculated from 16S rRNA counts (rarefied to 30,000 reads) of N independent experiments. Each data point (n) represents pooled root tissue harvested from two sample wells, each with 16 seeds planted. A Shift in Community Composition Is Observed for Plant Lines Lacking Coumarin Biosynthesis When Grown Under Iron Deficiency. 
 Oxidized coumarins downstream of scopoletin, such as esculetin, fraxetin, and sideretin, are typically synthesized and exuded by A. thaliana roots under iron deficiency to aid in the mobilization of otherwise biologically inaccessible forms of iron ( 12 ) ( Fig. 3 A ). F6′H1 represents the dedicated biosynthetic step to coumarin production; mutations in this gene are unable to biosynthesize the coumarins shown in Fig. 3 A ( 14 ). To investigate whether these oxidized coumarins affected the SynCom composition, we compared microbial community profiles of f6 ′ h1 and wild type in iron-deficient growth conditions ( Fig. 2 B ). While there was no significant shift in microbial community profile between wild type and f6 ′ h1-1 in nutrient-replete conditions, we observed community profiles distinct from wild type in iron-deficient conditions in two of the three experiments (ANOSIM, P < 0.01) ( SI Appendix , Fig. S4 ). Inspection at the strain level revealed a consistent increase in the relative abundance of Pseudomonas sp. Root329 compared with wild type in replete media ( Fig. 2 B ) and compared with wild type in iron-deficient media (as determined by Z-score analysis; Fig. 3 B ). In line with the importance of coumarin release in shaping the microbiome composition, we observed community profiles similar to f6 ′ h1 in pdr9 (PLEIOTROPIC DRUG RESISTANCE 9) mutants ( Fig. 3 ). The ATP-binding cassette transporter PDR9 is required for the selective exudation of catecholic coumarins (esculetin, fraxetin, and sideretin) under iron deficiency in Arabidopsis roots ( 29 ). 
 Fig. 3. 

 Open in a new tab 
 Root-exuded coumarins shift the microbial community profile at the root. ( A ) Schematic of the A. thaliana iron homeostasis genetic repertoire, including genes involved in oxidized coumarin biosynthesis and release. Sideretin, fraxetin, and esculetin are confirmed major coumarins exuded by wild-type roots under iron deficiency at circumneutral pH. ( B ) Scatter plot of strain Z scores comparing each plant genotype with wild type in iron-deficient conditions. Here, the strain Z score was defined as the difference between read counts for strains at the roots of mutant lines and the mean of corresponding strains from synchronously grown wild-type roots in iron-deficient media, normalized to the SD of read counts for the strain at the wild-type root (Z = ( x i_mutant − μi_WT)/σi_WT). Strains are sorted based on phylogeny. Black dashed lines convey Z scores corresponding to P = 0.01 and the mean is given by black bars. Asterisks indicate strains that significantly differ for that genotype. Z scores were calculated from 16S rRNA counts (rarefied to 30,000 reads) of N independent experiments. Each data point (n) represents pooled root tissue harvested from two sample wells, each with 16 seeds planted. To confirm that the observed community shift was due to catecholic coumarins, and not to secondary effects brought on by impaired host iron homeostasis in f6 ′ h1 lines, we included a fro2 line for root community analysis. Ferric chelate reductase 2 (FRO2) is the principal ferric chelate reductase at the A. thaliana root ( 30 ) ( Fig. 3 A ). The fro2 line exhibits severe iron deficiency symptoms in alkaline soils with low iron bioavailability. The community profile shifts in f6 ′ h1-1 lines are significantly dissimilar from wild-type plants, whereas the community profiles of fro2 lines are not ( Fig. 3 B and SI Appendix , Fig. S6 ), suggesting that the observed community profile shifts are specific to the lack of coumarin biosynthesis in f6 ′ h1-1 , rather than impaired host iron homeostasis. 
 Next, root microbial community profiles of insertion mutants in scopoletin-8-hydroxylase (S8H; s8h ) and in cytochrome P450 82C4 (CYP82C4; cyp82c4 ) were compared with wild type to determine whether any particular coumarin type is exclusively involved in the community shifts observed in f6 ′ h1 ( Fig. 3 A ). The primary coumarin types exuded under iron deficiency differ for each of the mutant lines tested, with wild type exuding primarily sideretin, fraxetin, and esculetin; cyp82c4 exuding primarily fraxetin and esculetin; and s8h exuding mainly esculetin and scopoletin in our hydroponic growth conditions ( 12 ) ( Fig. 3 A ). Both s8h and cyp82c4 plants assembled a root community profile distinct from f6 ′ h1-1 or f6 ′ h1-2 , and more similar to wild type, suggesting that exudation of known A. thaliana -biosynthesized catecholic coumarins is sufficient to bring about the community profile observed in wild-type plants ( Fig. 3 B and SI Appendix , Fig. S7 ). An f6 ′ h1 -Dependent Increase in Abundance of Pseudomonas sp. Root329 Is Consistent and Robust Across Different SynCom Compositions. 
 Upon closer inspection of the relative abundances for individual bacterial strains at the root of wild type and f6 ′ h1 , Pseudomonas sp. Root329 was found to consistently respond positively to lines that lack biosynthesis and release of oxidized coumarins. In contrast, some root-colonizing bacteria tended toward an unchanged or, in some cases, negative response ( Agrobacterium sp. Root491; Figs. 3 B and 4 A ). Such compensatory shifts are expected in community profiling by 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing, making it a challenge to assess the direction of causality. To address whether Pseudomonas sp. Root329 is directly affected by plant-derived coumarins, we ( i ) performed in silico rescaling and NMDS by omitting 16S rRNA gene amplicon reads belonging to Pseudomonas sp. Root329 before rarefying and ( ii ) tested whether an increase in Pseudomonas sp. Root329 was robust across SynComs of varying size and composition. Removing Pseudomonas sp. Root329 by in silico rescaling substantially diminished the community profile shift between wild type and f6 ′ h1 based on NMDS and ANOSIM ( SI Appendix , Fig. S8 A ). Next, by either removing the read count-dominant Rhizobium sp. Root149 or reducing the size of the SynCom to 14 members, the increase in Pseudomonas sp. Root329 persisted ( SI Appendix , Fig. S8 B ). Furthermore, an increase in Pseudomonas sp. Root329 persisted when the community consisted solely of two members. Notably, by reducing the size of the SynCom, a more pronounced increase in abundance for Acidovorax sp. Root70 at the f6 ′ h1 root was observed. 
 Fig. 4. 

 Open in a new tab 
 Purified coumarins partially shift the microbial community to the composition found in wild-type plants, and specifically inhibit the growth of the differentially abundant Pseudomonas sp. Root329 isolate via an ROS-mediated mechanism. ( A ) Addition of 100 μM purified oxidized coumarins to the growth media of f6 ′ h1 lines partially phenocopies wild-type community composition. A scatter plot of Z scores comparing each treatment with wild type in iron-deficient conditions is shown. Z scores are calculated for each strain’s abundance at the mutant plant root compared with its abundance at synchronously grown wild-type roots. Black dashed lines convey Z scores corresponding to P = 0.01 and the mean is given by black bars. Z scores were calculated from rarefied 16S rRNA counts (30,000 reads per sample). Each data point (n) represents pooled root tissue harvested from two sample wells, each with 16 seeds planted. In comparison to Figs. 2 B and 3 B , this analysis did not include Sphingopyxis sp. Root1497 (for which reads were consistently below the threshold of three counts) and did include Streptomyces sp. Root1310. ( B ) Assays of bacterial growth inhibition surrounding 5-mm filter discs (white circles) infused with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; control) or 10 mM scopoletin, fraxetin, or sideretin (all in 10% DMSO). Bacteria were inoculated into nutrient-agar plates, and filter discs were placed on top of agar. Images were taken after 48 h of growth at 30 °C. The extent of the dark zones surrounding the filter discs represents the degree of bacterial growth inhibition. The experiment was repeated three times with similar results. ( C ) Bacterial growth surrounding filter discs infused with DMSO (control), sideretin, or hydrogen peroxide at 5 mM (all in 10% DMSO). The conditionality of sideretin-mediated growth inhibition was assessed by addition of insoluble iron (FeCl3), soluble iron (Fe-EDTA), or catalase to nutrient-agar plates before inoculation. ( D ) Degree of growth inhibition following H2O2 challenge observed for a range of pseudomonads of varied origin. Colors (green to red) represent the magnitude of inhibition observed ( SI Appendix , Fig. S12 ). The phylogenetic tree was generated by neighbor joining using the housekeeping genes DNA gyrase ( gyrB ), citrate synthase ( gltA ), and DNA polymerase sigma-70 ( rpoD ). Only consensus support percentages deviating from 100 are shown at the nodes (1,000 tree resamplings in total). The f6′h1 Microbial Community Profile is Partially Shifted to that of Wild-Type by Addition of Coumarins. 
 We assessed the microbial community profiles of f6 ′ h1 lines grown in the presence of scopoletin, fraxetin, or sideretin under iron-deficient conditions ( Fig. 4 A and SI Appendix , Fig. S9 ). Pseudomonas sp. Root329 became less abundant at the f6 ′ h1 root with the addition of either coumarin, while the increase in Acidovorax sp. Root70 could be abolished by the addition of fraxetin. Interestingly, increases in the relative abundance of Agrobacterium sp. Root491, Methylobacterium sp. Root483D1, Agromyces sp. Root1464, and Streptomyces sp. Root1310 were observed upon addition of either coumarin, possibly due to growth on coumarins, or degradation products, as substrate. Appreciable levels of sideretin were observed in the media of f6 ′ h1 plants that were chemically complemented with scopoletin, consistent with previous studies ( 14 ), suggesting that the community shifts observed may also be caused by biosynthetic conversion of the coumarin types added. 
 Pseudomonas sp. Root329 Growth Is Inhibited by Iron-Mobilizing Coumarins in Vitro. 
 To determine if F6′H1-dependent coumarins directly impact the growth of bacterial isolates that comprise the SynCom, we analyzed the sensitivity of the major coumarin-responsive root-proliferating SynCom members to chemically-pure samples of scopoletin, fraxetin, and sideretin in vitro. Notably, severe growth inhibition of Pseudomonas sp. Root329 by the predominant wild-type coumarin sideretin, and moderate inhibition by fraxetin were observed using a halo inhibition assay ( Fig. 4 B ). This phenomenon was not observed for Pseudomonas simiae WCS417, a host-beneficial strain similarly within the Pseudomonas fluorescens clade. The differentially abundant strains Rhizobium sp. Root149 and Agrobacterium sp. Root491 ( P < 0.05) were not comparably affected by either coumarin; however, a faint ring of apparent growth inhibition was observed surrounding fraxetin-infused discs for both. 
 We hypothesized that some oxidized coumarins’ molecular structures, harboring a reduced catechol moiety, allow for the reduction of oxygen to ROS, which are known potent antimicrobials. Hydrogen peroxide was generated by the catecholic coumarins sideretin, fraxetin, and esculetin in iron-deficient Murashige and Skoog media over a 24-h period, but not for scopoletin or isofraxidin, both of which lack redox functionality ( SI Appendix , Fig. S10 ). In support of a model for coumarin-mediated antimicrobial activity via hydrogen peroxide, the inhibitory activity of sideretin on Pseudomonas sp. Root329 could be abolished with addition of catalase ( Fig. 4 C ). Notably, the antimicrobial activity of sideretin could further be reduced by the addition of soluble iron ( Fig. 4 C ). These findings suggest that peroxide is generated by catecholic coumarins when iron is scarce, the typical environment in which iron-mobilizing coumarins are biosynthesized and exuded by the A. thaliana root. Sideretin was the most potent hydrogen peroxide generator at short time scales ( SI Appendix , Fig. S10 ), which may explain its antimicrobial effect on Pseudomonas sp. Root329 in the nutrient-agar assay, which was performed over a 24-h timespan. Further in support of an ROS-mediated mechanism of inhibition, we challenged the most abundant SynCom members at the root with hydrogen peroxide and found that Pseudomonas sp. Root329 and Acidovorax sp. Root70 were the most affected (based on differential colony-forming unit counts) ( SI Appendix , Fig. S11 ). These findings were in line with strains enriched at the f6 ′ h1 root. 
 Finally, we investigated the degree to which a range of pseudomonads isolated from the roots of A. thaliana grown in Cologne loamy soils, the Mason Farm Preserve in North Carolina, and ground water in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, tolerated H2O2 ( SI Appendix , Table S3 and Fig. S12 ). Many pseudomonads belonged to the P. fluorescens clade and were more than 97% similar at the 16S rRNA locus, so could not be distinguishable at the OTU level. Large differences in the degree of H2O2 tolerance were observed for these strains, with a subclade of pseudomonads exhibiting more pronounced sensitivity ( Fig. 4 D ). Discussion 
 Studies into the host factors that shape the A. thaliana rhizosphere community structure have been few, with pioneering work showing that SA is an important player modulating root community composition ( 20 ). In contrast to phytohormones, a recent study has correlated microbial growth at the root of oat to the microbe’s ability to utilize compounds found to be exuded ( 5 ). In general, it was found that utilization of aromatic amino acids is highly correlated with growth at the root. These examples provided impetus for investigating the role of the broader range of diverse metabolites exuded from plant roots on the composition and function of the root microbiome. 
 By employing a SynCom, the importance of specialized metabolites on microbial community composition could readily be investigated. Of the mutant lines investigated, we find significant changes in relative microbial abundances for coumarin biosynthesis mutants, specifically under iron-limiting conditions. Notably, we find an average 3-fold increased RA of Pseudomonas sp. Root329 for plant lines devoid of coumarin biosynthesis or exudation, and provide evidence that this change in relative abundance could be due to this strain’s sensitivity to the major catecholic coumarins produced by iron-deficient wild-type plants. As a rough comparison, the changes in relative abundances observed in this study are on par with those observed in previous studies utilizing SynComs. For example, an increase in Terracoccus sp. relative abundance (RA) of about 2-fold, and a 3-fold decrease in Mitsuria sp. RA upon addition of SA to the roots of Arabidopsis have been shown to correspond to these strains’ growth response to SA in vitro ( 20 ). 
 Our study provides direct evidence that specialized metabolites can cause reproducible changes in community composition of plant roots. While such interactions are more complex in soil-grown plants, a hydroponic system using a defined bacterial community provides clear evidence that relatively small changes in the secretion of specialized metabolites could impact microbial community structure—evidence that can subsequently be validated in natural soils. For example, in light of our data, one possible explanation for the observed variation of communities in the roots of f6 ′ h1 plants grown in natural soil ( 11 ) compared with those of wild type could be explained by catecholic coumarins produced under iron limitation: esculetin, fraxetin, and sideretin. Interestingly, the Pseudomonas genus was not differentially abundant in this study of f6 ′ h1 plants in natural soils ( 11 ). In addition to the unknown effects chemically complex soils may have on coumarin activity, our finding that Pseudomonas sp. isolates within the same OTU exhibit varying degrees of sensitivity to fraxetin and sideretin, and to hydrogen peroxide in general, may explain this discrepancy. In our study, the use of a defined SynCom facilitated the discovery of a mechanism of action within the rhizosphere that may have otherwise been overlooked. 
 We propose that the catechol moiety of iron-mobilizing coumarins facilitates redox reactions that can both mobilize ferric iron and generate ROS, such as hydrogen peroxide, with detrimental effects on microbial proliferation. Similar antimicrobial mechanisms of action have been described for phenazines produced by some pseudomonads: These redox-active small molecules’ functionality (either generation of ROS or oxidation by metal ions) is determined by the surrounding iron and oxygen levels ( 31 ). ROS have been implicated in the mechanism of action for a number of antimicrobials, suggesting that the mechanisms underlying tolerance to catecholic coumarins may be similar to those of known antimicrobials ( 32 ). Furthermore, a number of studies have revealed a link between microbial iron homeostasis and sensitivity to ROS, mainly due to the important role iron plays in bacterial respiration and its involvement in Fenton chemistry within the cell ( 33 ). 
 Bacteria harbor sophisticated mechanisms for iron mobilization and sequestration that, in turn, may have multifaceted effects on host fitness ( 34 , 35 ). Root bacterial community shifts brought on by iron-mobilizing coumarins could bestow an adaptation to the host plant experiencing iron deficiency, for example, by specifically fending off strong microbial competitors for iron. It has previously been shown that scopoletin could inhibit the growth of fungal pathogens ( 11 ). Whether this is also the case for the catecholic coumarins tested here is not yet known. The intriguing possibility exists that plants have specialized to, depending on the neighboring biota, exude intermediates of the same metabolic pathway to modulate the abundances of microbes spanning a large phylogenetic range. 
 Root-associated bacteria may have evolved mechanisms to sense coumarins that may prove adaptive to the host plant exhibiting iron-deficiency symptoms. We explored this possibility using an agar plate-based assay to assess seedling growth upon inoculation with SynCom members under iron deficiency. While we observed seedling growth promotion upon inoculation of the full SynCom for wild-type plants ( SI Appendix , Fig. S13 ), these effects were also conferred by the majority of individual SynCom members in monoassociation experiments (with the exception of the Firmicutes, which proliferate poorly at the root; SI Appendix , Fig. S14 ). Furthermore, we observed no significant difference in growth of wild-type and f6′h1 seedlings inoculated with Pseudomonas sp. Root329, Rhizobium sp. Root149 (an isolate that did not display significant RA shifts in f6 ′ h1 ), or plants inoculated with equal densities of both strains ( SI Appendix , Fig. S15 ). It remains possible, however, that a plant growth benefit via host-induced community shifts may be observed in more complex microcosms or soils. Future work should investigate the transcriptional response of microbial isolates to coumarins to identify responsive genes, which may offer insights into the molecular mechanisms underpinning seedling growth promotion. 
 We demonstrate here the promise of employing genetic disruption mutants and SynComs to identify the specific molecular players that sculpt the rhizosphere microbiome. In particular, the ability to track individual members of SynComs facilitates subsequent investigations of the underlying molecular mechanism in vitro ( 36 ). A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms required for bacterial colonization of the root and rhizosphere will facilitate efforts toward engineering host-beneficial microbial consortia. Our finding that proliferation of specific microbial strains is affected by iron-mobilizing coumarins can be used to effectively engineer the rhizosphere to improve crop growth in alkaline soils, which make up a third of the world’s arable soils ( 37 ). Materials and Methods 
 A. thaliana seeds were surface-sterilized with 70% ethanol and 50% bleach prior to germination in the hydroponics platform. All SynCom strains were grown to saturation in quarter-strength tryptic soy broth and washed with phosphate-buffered saline before root inoculation. Full details of materials and methods are provided in SI Appendix . Supplementary Material 
 Supplementary File 

 pnas.1820691116.sapp.pdf (26.2MB, pdf) 
 Supplementary File 

 pnas.1820691116.sd01.xlsx (21.2KB, xlsx) 
 Acknowledgments 
 We thank K. Huang, J. Rajniak, R. Garrido-Oter, M. Hashimoto, and H. Inoue for valuable discussions, and S. Long, S. Sirk, A. Denisin, A. Klein, C. Liou, R. Nett, and F. Hol for valuable feedback on the manuscript. We thank X. Ji for technical assistance with Illumina sequencing at the Stanford Functional Genomics Facility and H. Inoue for help in developing seedling growth promotion assays. M.J.E.E.E.V. acknowledges support from the Stanford Bio-X Graduate Fellowship. This work was supported by HHMI and Simons Foundation Grant 55108565 and by NIH DP2 Grant AT008321 (to E.S.S.). Footnotes 

 The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
 This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. 
 This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1820691116/-/DCSupplemental . 
 References 

 1. van Dam N. M., Bouwmeester H. J., Metabolomics in the rhizosphere: Tapping into belowground chemical communication. Trends Plant Sci.
21, 256–265 (2016). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 2. Massalha H., Korenblum E., Tholl D., Aharoni A., Small molecules below-ground: The role of specialized metabolites in the rhizosphere. Plant J.
90, 788–807 (2017). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 3. Nguyen C., Rhizodeposition of organic C by plants: Mechanisms and controls. Agronomie
23, 375–396 (2003). [ Google Scholar ] 

 4. Gunina A., Kuzyakov Y., Sugars in soil and sweets for microorganisms: Review of origin, content, composition and fate. Soil Biol. Biochem.
90, 87–100 (2015). [ Google Scholar ] 

 5. Zhalnina K., et al. , Dynamic root exudate chemistry and microbial substrate preferences drive patterns in rhizosphere microbial community assembly. Nat. Microbiol.
3, 470–480 (2018). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 6. Walters W. A., et al. , Large-scale replicated field study of maize rhizosphere identifies heritable microbes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
115, 7368–7373 (2018). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 7. Berendsen R. L., Pieterse C. M. J., Bakker P. A. H. M., The rhizosphere microbiome and plant health. Trends Plant Sci.
17, 478–486 (2012). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 8. Micallef S. A., Shiaris M. P., Colón-Carmona A., Influence of Arabidopsis thaliana accessions on rhizobacterial communities and natural variation in root exudates. J. Exp. Bot.
60, 1729–1742 (2009). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 9. Finkel O. M., Castrillo G., Herrera Paredes S., Salas González I., Dangl J. L., Understanding and exploiting plant beneficial microbes. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.
38, 155–163 (2017). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 10. Durán P., et al. , Microbial interkingdom interactions in roots promote Arabidopsis survival. Cell
175, 973–983.e14 (2018). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 11. Stringlis I. A., et al. , MYB72-dependent coumarin exudation shapes root microbiome assembly to promote plant health. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
115, E5213–E5222 (2018). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 12. Rajniak J., et al. , Biosynthesis of redox-active metabolites in response to iron deficiency in plants. Nat. Chem. Biol.
14, 442–450 (2018). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 13. Bednarek P., et al. , A glucosinolate metabolism pathway in living plant cells mediates broad-spectrum antifungal defense. Science
323, 101–106 (2009). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 14. Schmid N. B., et al. , Feruloyl-CoA 6′-Hydroxylase1-dependent coumarins mediate iron acquisition from alkaline substrates in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol.
164, 160–172 (2014). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 15. Strehmel N., Böttcher C., Schmidt S., Scheel D., Profiling of secondary metabolites in root exudates of Arabidopsis thaliana. Phytochemistry
108, 35–46 (2014). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 16. Mönchgesang S., et al. , Natural variation of root exudates in Arabidopsis thaliana-linking metabolomic and genomic data. Sci. Rep.
6, 29033 (2016). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 17. Peters N. K., Frost J. W., Long S. R., A plant flavone, luteolin, induces expression of Rhizobium meliloti nodulation genes. Science
233, 977–980 (1986). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 18. Zgadzaj R., et al. , Root nodule symbiosis in Lotus japonicus drives the establishment of distinctive rhizosphere, root, and nodule bacterial communities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
113, E7996–E8005 (2016). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 19. Hiruma K., et al. , Root endophyte Colletotrichum tofieldiae confers plant fitness benefits that are phosphate status dependent. Cell
165, 464–474 (2016). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 20. Lebeis S. L., et al. , Salicylic acid modulates colonization of the root microbiome by specific bacterial taxa. Science
349, 860–864 (2015). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 21. Bai Y., et al. , Functional overlap of the Arabidopsis leaf and root microbiota. Nature
528, 364–369 (2015). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 22. D’Auria J. C., Gershenzon J., The secondary metabolism of Arabidopsis thaliana: Growing like a weed. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.
8, 308–316 (2005). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 23. Shirley B. W., et al. , Analysis of Arabidopsis mutants deficient in flavonoid biosynthesis. Plant J.
8, 659–671 (1995). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 24. Klein A. P., Anarat-Cappillino G., Sattely E. S., Minimum set of cytochromes P450 for reconstituting the biosynthesis of camalexin, a major Arabidopsis antibiotic. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.
52, 13625–13628 (2013). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 25. Gigolashvili T., Yatusevich R., Berger B., Müller C., Flügge U.-I., The R2R3-MYB transcription factor HAG1/MYB28 is a regulator of methionine-derived glucosinolate biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J.
51, 247–261 (2007). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 26. Lundberg D. S., et al. , Defining the core Arabidopsis thaliana root microbiome. Nature
488, 86–90 (2012). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 27. Bulgarelli D., et al. , Revealing structure and assembly cues for Arabidopsis root-inhabiting bacterial microbiota. Nature
488, 91–95 (2012). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 28. Zamioudis C., et al. , Rhizobacterial volatiles and photosynthesis-related signals coordinate MYB72 expression in Arabidopsis roots during onset of induced systemic resistance and iron-deficiency responses. Plant J.
84, 309–322 (2015). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 29. Ziegler J., Schmidt S., Strehmel N., Scheel D., Abel S., Arabidopsis transporter ABCG37/PDR9 contributes primarily highly oxygenated coumarins to root exudation. Sci. Rep.
7, 3704 (2017). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 30. Connolly E. L., Campbell N. H., Grotz N., Prichard C. L., Guerinot M. L., Overexpression of the FRO2 ferric chelate reductase confers tolerance to growth on low iron and uncovers posttranscriptional control. Plant Physiol.
133, 1102–1110 (2003). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 31. Wang Y., Newman D. K., Redox reactions of phenazine antibiotics with ferric (hydr)oxides and molecular oxygen. Environ. Sci. Technol.
42, 2380–2386 (2008). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 32. Dwyer D. J., et al. , Antibiotics induce redox-related physiological alterations as part of their lethality. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
111, E2100–E2109 (2014). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 33. Yeom J., Imlay J. A., Park W., Iron homeostasis affects antibiotic-mediated cell death in Pseudomonas species. J. Biol. Chem.
285, 22689–22695 (2010). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 34. Vansuyt G., Robin A., Briat J.-F., Curie C., Lemanceau P., Iron acquisition from Fe-pyoverdine by Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact.
20, 441–447 (2007). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 35. Verbon E. H., et al. , Iron and immunity. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol.
55, 355–375 (2017). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 36. Herrera Paredes S., et al. , Design of synthetic bacterial communities for predictable plant phenotypes. PLoS Biol.
16, e2003962 (2018). [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

 37. Dessaux Y., Grandclément C., Faure D., Engineering the rhizosphere. Trends Plant Sci.
21, 266–278 (2016). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 Associated Data 
 This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. 
 Supplementary Materials 
 Supplementary File 

 pnas.1820691116.sapp.pdf (26.2MB, pdf) 
 Supplementary File 

 pnas.1820691116.sd01.xlsx (21.2KB, xlsx) 

 Articles from Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America are provided here courtesy of National Academy of Sciences 

 ACTIONS 

 View on publisher site 

 PDF (1.2 MB) 

 Cite 

 Collections 

 Permalink 

 PERMALINK 

 Copy 

 RESOURCES 

 Similar articles

 Cited by other articles

 Links to NCBI Databases

 Cite 

 Copy 

 Download .nbib 
 .nbib 

 Format: 

 AMA

 APA

 MLA

 NLM

 Add to Collections 

 Create a new collection 

 Add to an existing collection 

 Name your collection
 * 

 Choose a collection

 Unable to load your collection due to an error
 Please try again 

 Add

 Cancel

 Follow NCBI

 NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 

 NCBI on Facebook 

 NCBI on LinkedIn 

 NCBI on GitHub 

 NCBI RSS feed 

 Connect with NLM

 NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 

 NLM on Facebook 

 NLM on YouTube 

 National Library of Medicine
 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 

 Web Policies

 FOIA

 HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

 Help

 Accessibility

 Careers

 NLM

 NIH

 HHS

 USA.gov

 Back to Top 

 window.ncbi = window.ncbi || {};
 window.ncbi.pmc = window.ncbi.pmc || {};
 window.ncbi.pmc.options = {
 logLevel: 'INFO',

 staticEndpoint: 'https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/pd-medc-pmc-cloudpmc-viewer/production/9b1d9d87/var/data/static/',

 citeCookieName: 'pmc-cf',
 };

 jQuery.getScript("https://cdn.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/core/alerts/alerts.js", function () {
 galert(['div.nav_and_browser', 'div.header', '#universal_header', '.usa-banner', 'body > *:nth-child(1)'])
 });

 var exports = {};
