1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 8;16(12):e0259957. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259957. 
eCollection 2021.

The legume-rhizobia symbiosis can be supported on Mars soil simulants.

Rainwater R(1), Mukherjee A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Central Arkansas, Conway, AR, United 
States of America.

Legumes (soybeans, peas, lentils, etc.) play important roles in agriculture on 
Earth because of their food value and their ability to form a mutualistic 
beneficial association with rhizobia bacteria. In this association, the host 
plant benefits from atmospheric nitrogen fixation by rhizobia. The presence of 
nitrogen in the Mars atmosphere offers the possibility to take advantage of this 
important plant-microbe association. While some studies have shown that Mars 
soil simulants can support plant growth, none have investigated if these soils 
can support the legume-rhizobia symbiosis. In this study, we investigated the 
establishment of the legume-rhizobia symbiosis on different Mars soil simulants 
(different grades of the Mojave Mars Simulant (MMS)-1: Coarse, Fine, Unsorted, 
Superfine, and the MMS-2 simulant). We used the model legume, Medicago 
truncatula, and its symbiotic partners, Sinorhizobium meliloti and Sinorhizobium 
medicae, in these experiments. Our results show that root nodules could develop 
on M. truncatula roots when grown on these Mars soil simulants and were 
comparable to those formed on plants that were grown on sand. We also detected 
nifH (a reporter gene for nitrogen fixation) expression inside these nodules. 
Our results indicate that the different Mars soil simulants used in this study 
can support legume-rhizobia symbiosis. While the average number of lateral roots 
and nodule numbers were comparable on plants grown on the different soil 
simulants, total plant mass was higher in plants grown on MMS-2 soil than on 
MMS-1 soil and its variants. Our results imply that the chemical composition of 
the simulants is more critical than their grain size for plant mass. Based on 
these results, we recommend that the MMS-2 Superfine soil simulant is a better 
fit than the MMS-1 soil and it's variants for future studies. Our findings can 
serve as an excellent resource for future studies investigating beneficial 
plant-microbe associations for sustainable agriculture on Mars.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259957
PMCID: PMC8654199
PMID: 34879082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.