1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Jan;80(2):788-96. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02742-13. Epub
 2013 Nov 15.

Interspecies interactions determine the impact of the gut microbiota on nutrient 
allocation in Drosophila melanogaster.

Newell PD(1), Douglas AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology and Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, 
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA.

The animal gut is perpetually exposed to microorganisms, and this microbiota 
affects development, nutrient allocation, and immune homeostasis. A major 
challenge is to understand the contribution of individual microbial species and 
interactions among species in shaping these microbe-dependent traits. Using the 
Drosophila melanogaster gut microbiota, we tested whether microbe-dependent 
performance and nutritional traits of Drosophila are functionally modular, i.e., 
whether the impact of each microbial taxon on host traits is independent of the 
presence of other microbial taxa. Gnotobiotic flies were constructed with one or 
a set of five of the Acetobacter and Lactobacillus species which dominate the 
gut microbiota of conventional flies (Drosophila with untreated microbiota). 
Axenic (microbiota-free) flies exhibited prolonged development time and elevated 
glucose and triglyceride contents. The low glucose content of conventional flies 
was recapitulated in gnotobiotic Drosophila flies colonized with any of the 5 
bacterial taxa tested. In contrast, the development rates and triglyceride 
levels in monocolonized flies varied depending on the taxon present: Acetobacter 
species supported the largest reductions, while most Lactobacillus species had 
no effect. Only flies with both Acetobacter and Lactobacillus had triglyceride 
contents restored to the level in conventional flies. This could be attributed 
to two processes: Lactobacillus-mediated promotion of Acetobacter abundance in 
the fly and a significant negative correlation between fly triglyceride content 
and Acetobacter abundance. We conclude that the microbial basis of host traits 
varies in both specificity and modularity; microbe-mediated reduction in glucose 
is relatively nonspecific and modular, while triglyceride content is influenced 
by interactions among microbes.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02742-13
PMCID: PMC3911109
PMID: 24242251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]