1. mSystems. 2022 Dec 20;7(6):e0095122. doi: 10.1128/msystems.00951-22. Epub 2022
 Dec 6.

A Reproducible and Tunable Synthetic Soil Microbial Community Provides New 
Insights into Microbial Ecology.

Coker J(1), Zhalnina K(2), Marotz C(1), Thiruppathy D(3), Tjuanta M(3), D'Elia 
G(3), Hailu R(3), Mahosky T(3), Rowan M(3), Northen TR(2)(4), Zengler 
K(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(2)Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology Division, Berkeley Lab, Berkeley, 
California, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(4)The DOE Joint Genome Institute, Berkeley Lab, Berkeley, California, USA.
(5)Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, California, USA.

Microbial soil communities form commensal relationships with plants to promote 
the growth of both parties. The optimization of plant-microbe interactions to 
advance sustainable agriculture is an important field in agricultural research. 
However, investigation in this field is hindered by a lack of model microbial 
community systems and efficient approaches for building these communities. Two 
key challenges in developing standardized model communities are maintaining 
community diversity over time and storing/resuscitating these communities after 
cryopreservation, especially considering the different growth rates of 
organisms. Here, a model synthetic community (SynCom) of 16 soil microorganisms 
commonly found in the rhizosphere of diverse plant species, isolated from soil 
surrounding a single switchgrass plant, has been developed and optimized for in 
vitro experiments. The model soil community grows reproducibly between 
replicates and experiments, with a high community α-diversity being achieved 
through growth in low-nutrient media and through the adjustment of the starting 
composition ratios for the growth of individual organisms. The community can 
additionally be cryopreserved with glycerol, allowing for easy replication and 
dissemination of this in vitro system. Furthermore, the SynCom also grows 
reproducibly in fabricated ecosystem devices (EcoFABs), demonstrating the 
application of this community to an existing in vitro plant-microbe system. 
EcoFABs allow reproducible research in model plant systems, offering the precise 
control of environmental conditions and the easy measurement of plant microbe 
metrics. Our results demonstrate the generation of a stable and diverse 
microbial SynCom for the rhizosphere that can be used with EcoFAB devices and 
can be shared between research groups for maximum reproducibility. IMPORTANCE 
Microbes associate with plants in distinct soil communities to the benefit of 
both the soil microbes and the plants. Interactions between plants and these 
microbes can improve plant growth and health and are therefore a field of study 
in sustainable agricultural research. In this study, a model community of 16 
soil bacteria has been developed to further the reproducible study of plant-soil 
microbe interactions. The preservation of the microbial community has been 
optimized for dissemination to other research settings. Overall, this work will 
advance soil microbe research through the optimization of a robust, reproducible 
model community.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.00951-22
PMCID: PMC9765266
PMID: 36472419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.