1. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2023 Sep;202:107941. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2023.107941.
 Epub 2023 Aug 5.

A simplified synthetic rhizosphere bacterial community steers plant oxylipin 
pathways for preventing foliar phytopathogens.

Huang J(1), Zhu L(2), Lu X(1), Cui F(3), Wang J(1), Zhou C(4).

Author information:
(1)Key Lab of Bio-Organic Fertilizer Creation, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, Anhui Science and Technology University, Chuzhou 233100, China.
(2)Key Lab of Bio-Organic Fertilizer Creation, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, Anhui Science and Technology University, Chuzhou 233100, China; School 
of Life Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China.
(3)Key Lab of Bio-Organic Fertilizer Creation, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, Anhui Science and Technology University, Chuzhou 233100, China. 
Electronic address: cuif@ahstu.edu.cn.
(4)Key Lab of Bio-Organic Fertilizer Creation, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, Anhui Science and Technology University, Chuzhou 233100, China; Jiangsu 
Provincial Key Lab of Solid Organic Waste Utilization, Jiangsu Collaborative 
Innovation Center of Solid Organic Wastes, Educational Ministry Engineering 
Center of Resource-Saving Fertilizers, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 
210095, China. Electronic address: zhoucheng@njau.edu.cn.

Rhizosphere-enriched microbes induced by foliar phytopathogen infection can be 
assembled into a functional community to enhance plant defense mechanisms. 
However, the functions of stably-colonizing rhizosphere microbiota are rarely 
investigated. In this study, Botrytis cinerea infection changed rhizosphere 
bacterial communities in tomato plants. The phytopathogen-infected plants 
recruited specific rhizosphere bacterial taxa, while several bacterial taxa 
stably colonized the rhizosphere, regardless of phytopathogen infection. Through 
the analysis of the rhizosphere bacterial community, we established a synthetic 
community harboring 8 phytopathogen-inducible and 30 stably-colonizing bacteria 
species. Furthermore, the 38-species community was simplified into a 
three-species community, consisting of one phytopathogen-inducible 
(Asticcacaulis sp.) and two stably-colonizing species (Arachidicoccus sp. And 
Phenylobacterium sp.). The simplified community provided a durable protection 
for the host plants by synergistic effects, with the phytopathogen-inducible 
species triggering plant defense responses and the stably-colonizing species 
promoting biofilm formation. The simplified community exhibited similar 
protective effects as the 38-species community. Moreover, the activation of 
oxylipin pathways in the phytopathogen-infected leaves was significantly 
intensified by the simplified community. However, the inhibited biosynthesis of 
antimicrobial divinyl ethers, including colneleic and colnelenic acid, fully 
abolished the community-induced plant disease resistance. In contrast, 
transgenic plants overexpressing SlLOX5 and SlDES1, with higher levels of 
divinyl ethers, displayed stronger resistance against B. cinerea compared to 
wild-type plants. Collectively, these findings provided insights into the 
utilization of the simplified community for preventing gray mold disease.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2023.107941
PMID: 37549573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.