1. Front Microbiol. 2026 Sep 9;17:1866842. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2026.1866842.
eCollection 2026.

Fructooligosaccharides-driven metabolism of a defined Lactobacillus probiotic
consortium modulates hepatic lipid accumulation in a reductionist in vitro gut
microbiota-liver interaction model.

Finazzi M(1), Bovio F(1), Forcella M(1), Lasagni M(2), Fusi P(1), Zampolli J(1),
Di Gennaro P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca,
Milano, Italy.
(2)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Milano-Bicocca,
Milano, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease may be
influenced by human gut microbiota-derived metabolites. Fructooligosaccharides
(FOS) and probiotic Lactobacillus species have been reported to be associated
with metabolic improvements. However, the strain-specific contribution of
defined probiotic consortia and the interplay between substrate-driven microbial
metabolites and hepatic lipid regulation remain insufficiently characterized.
This study aims to investigate whether FOS-driven metabolism of a three-strain
Lactobacillus consortium (L. plantarum PBS067, L. acidophilus PBS066, and L.
reuteri PBS072) modulates hepatocyte lipid accumulation in steatotic HepG2 cells
within a reconstructed reductionist in vitro human gut microbiota model.
METHODS: A previously validated minimal core community, representing metabolic
functions of the human gut microbiota, was supplemented with the probiotic
consortium and cultured in the presence of FOS with an average degree of
polymerization ~10. Lactobacillus strain growth and modulation, transcriptional
activation of FOS-related genes, and short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) metabolic
profiles were characterized. Microbiota-derived metabolites were then tested on
palmitate-induced steatotic HepG2 cells.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: FOS supported growth of both probiotic and minimal core
members in a strain-dependent manner within the community, with higher growth
levels of L. plantarum PBS067 and L. reuteri PBS072. RT-qPCR analyses of sacA,
scrB, and sacK1 genes revealed species-specific transcriptional activation and
context-dependent regulation of FOS utilization pathways. Microbial metabolic
profiling showed production of SCFAs and organic acids typical of carbohydrate
fermentation. Treatment of steatotic HepG2 cells with these metabolites
significantly reduced intracellular lipid accumulation and down-regulated Cd36
gene encoding a key fatty acid transporter involved in palmitic acid-induced
steatosis. These findings suggest that FOS-driven microbial metabolism within a
defined Lactobacillus consortium could be associated with hepatocyte lipid
uptake under controlled in vitro conditions, highlighting the interplay among
microbial transcriptional activation and their metabolic profiles.

Copyright © 2026 Finazzi, Bovio, Forcella, Lasagni, Fusi, Zampolli and Di
Gennaro.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2026.1866842
PMCID: PMC13599725
PMID: 42781020

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared that this work was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

===== OPEN-ACCESS FULL TEXT (Europe PMC PMC13599725) =====

pmc Front Microbiol Front Microbiol 1526 frontmicrobio 101548977 Front. Microbiol. Frontiers in Microbiology 1664-302X Frontiers Media SA PMC13599725 PMC13599725.1 13599725 13599725 42781020 10.3389/fmicb.2026.1866842 1 Original Research Fructooligosaccharides-driven metabolism of a defined Lactobacillus probiotic consortium modulates hepatic lipid accumulation in a reductionist in vitro gut microbiota–liver interaction model Finazzi Margherita
1
 Conceptualization Investigation Visualization Writing – original draft Bovio Federica
1
 Conceptualization Investigation Visualization Writing – original draft Forcella Matilde
1
 Conceptualization Investigation Visualization Writing – original draft Methodology Supervision Validation Lasagni Marina
2
 Conceptualization Investigation Visualization Writing – original draft Methodology Supervision Validation Software Fusi Paola
1
 Conceptualization Investigation Visualization Writing – original draft Methodology Supervision Validation Software Project administration Resources Writing – review & editing Zampolli Jessica
1
 Conceptualization Investigation Visualization Writing – original draft Methodology Supervision Validation Software Project administration Resources Writing – review & editing Data curation Di Gennaro Patrizia
1

*
 Conceptualization Investigation Visualization Writing – original draft Methodology Supervision Validation Software Project administration Resources Writing – review & editing Data curation 1 Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano , Italy 2 Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano , Italy * Correspondence: Patrizia Di Gennaro, patrizia.digennaro@unimib.it 09 9 2026 2026 17 506453 1866842 27 4 2026 19 8 2026 20 8 2026 09 09 2026 24 09 2026 24 09 2026 Copyright © 2026 Finazzi, Bovio, Forcella, Lasagni, Fusi, Zampolli and Di Gennaro. 2026 Finazzi, Bovio, Forcella, Lasagni, Fusi, Zampolli and Di Gennaro https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. Introduction Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease may be influenced by human gut microbiota-derived metabolites. Fructooligosaccharides (FOS) and probiotic Lactobacillus species have been reported to be associated with metabolic improvements. However, the strain-specific contribution of defined probiotic consortia and the interplay between substrate-driven microbial metabolites and hepatic lipid regulation remain insufficiently characterized. This study aims to investigate whether FOS-driven metabolism of a three-strain Lactobacillus consortium (L. plantarum PBS067, L. acidophilus PBS066, and L. reuteri PBS072) modulates hepatocyte lipid accumulation in steatotic HepG2 cells within a reconstructed reductionist in vitro human gut microbiota model. Methods A previously validated minimal core community, representing metabolic functions of the human gut microbiota, was supplemented with the probiotic consortium and cultured in the presence of FOS with an average degree of polymerization ~10. Lactobacillus strain growth and modulation, transcriptional activation of FOS-related genes, and short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) metabolic profiles were characterized. Microbiota-derived metabolites were then tested on palmitate-induced steatotic HepG2 cells. Results and discussion FOS supported growth of both probiotic and minimal core members in a strain-dependent manner within the community, with higher growth levels of L. plantarum PBS067 and L. reuteri PBS072. RT-qPCR analyses of sacA, scrB, and sacK1 genes revealed species-specific transcriptional activation and context-dependent regulation of FOS utilization pathways. Microbial metabolic profiling showed production of SCFAs and organic acids typical of carbohydrate fermentation. Treatment of steatotic HepG2 cells with these metabolites significantly reduced intracellular lipid accumulation and down-regulated Cd36 gene encoding a key fatty acid transporter involved in palmitic acid-induced steatosis. These findings suggest that FOS-driven microbial metabolism within a defined Lactobacillus consortium could be associated with hepatocyte lipid uptake under controlled in vitro conditions, highlighting the interplay among microbial transcriptional activation and their metabolic profiles. fructooligosaccharides Lactobacillus probiotics in vitro reconstructed human gut microbiota model gut-liver axis lipid accumulation steatosis short-chain fatty acids The author(s) declared that financial support was not received for this work and/or its publication. pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY section-at-acceptance Physiology and Metabolism of Microorganisms 1 Introduction Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), previously referred to as metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD) or non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), is identified as a condition marked by hepatic steatosis occurring in the context of metabolic dysregulation, including obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), or other dysfunctions ( Eslam et al., 2020 ). This condition affects approximately a quarter of the world's adult population (25%−35%), causing a substantial health and economic burden on societies worldwide ( Younossi et al., 2018 ; Eslam et al., 2020 ). To unravel the complex and multifactorial pathogenesis of MASLD, two models have been proposed ( Benedict and Zhang, 2017 ; Ma et al., 2025 ). In the classical “two hit” hypothesis, insulin resistance arising from obesity and T2DM promotes hepatic steatosis, whereas a second hit, driven by inflammatory cytokines, lipid peroxidation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and oxidative stress, leads to disease progression ( Fang et al., 2018 ). A second theory, known as “multiple parallel strikes,” hypothesizes that several metabolic, inflammatory, and oxidative factors act in parallel and synergistically contribute to MASLD development ( Ma et al., 2025 ). Within this multifactorial framework, growing evidence indicates that the gut–liver axis is a key regulator of MASLD pathogenesis. Indeed, the liver is anatomically and functionally connected to the intestine through the portal circulation, resulting in continuous exposure to gut-derived nutrients, microbial components, and metabolites. Alterations in gut microbiota composition and intestinal barrier integrity can increase the translocation of microbial products and metabolites to the liver ( Tilg et al., 2016 ). Dietary factors are key modulators of the human gut microbiota and consequently of the host responses. Among these, prebiotics such as fructo-oligosaccharides (FOS) have attracted considerable attention. Both preclinical and clinical studies indicate that FOS supplementation can attenuate hepatic steatosis and metabolic dysfunction by modulating gut microbiota function and reducing endotoxemia. Moreover, microbial-derived metabolites have been shown to influence hepatic lipid metabolism, insulin sensitivity, and inflammatory response ( Delzenne et al., 2011 ; Bindels et al., 2015 ; Canfora et al., 2019 ; Cani et al., 2007 ; Huang et al., 2023 ). Thus, FOS-driven microbial metabolism has a prominent role in regulating the gut-liver axis in the context of MASLD. In addition to prebiotics, probiotics can influence the human gut microbiota by modulating microbial metabolic products, strengthening intestinal barrier integrity, and reducing the translocation of pro-inflammatory microbial metabolites to the liver ( Sanders et al., 2019 ). Among probiotic taxa, the genus Lactobacillus has been extensively studied for its metabolic versatility and capacity to ferment complex carbohydrates, including FOS. Lactobacillus species are known to produce a range of bioactive metabolites that have been associated with improved lipid metabolism, relative to MASLD pathogenesis ( Kobyliak et al., 2016 ; Markowiak and Sliżewska, 2017 ). Consistently, several experimental and clinical studies have reported that Lactobacillus-based probiotic interventions can improve hepatic steatosis and metabolic parameters ( Abenavoli et al., 2019 ; Mularczyk et al., 2021 ; Huang et al., 2020 ). Many in vivo studies, particularly in rodents, reflect the physiological complexity of host-microbiota interactions involving prebiotics, individual probiotic strains or their metabolites to investigate how microbial metabolites affect hepatic steatosis and metabolic dysfunction ( Cao et al., 2023 ; Teng et al., 2024 ; Park et al., 2020 ). However, these models often limit the ability to disentangle cause-and-effect relationships due to the simultaneous contributions of multiple host, microbial, and environmental variables. More complex in vitro gut-mimicking systems, including donor-derived microbiota-based models, dynamic fermentation platforms, and integrated gut-liver approaches, can more closely reproduce human gut physiology and interindividual variability. Nevertheless, reductionist in vitro microbial community models remain useful controlled and reproducible frameworks to investigate gut microbiota-host metabolic interactions while preserving key ecological features, including interspecies interactions and substrate-dependent metabolic responses. These models also enable the setup of defined microbial consortia with strain-specific contributions to evaluate how specific dietary substrates, such as prebiotics, shape strain-level microbial dynamics, metabolic outputs resulting from microbial interactions, and their potential influence on host cell function ( Bayer et al., 2021 ; De Roy et al., 2014 ; Van de Wiele et al., 2015 ). The aim of this study is to investigate whether a defined three-strain Lactobacillus probiotic consortium (L. plantarum PBS067, L. acidophilus PBS066, and L. reuteri PBS072) can modulate hepatic lipid accumulation and MASLD-related gene expression through microbiota-derived metabolites. To this end, a reductionist reconstructed in vitro human gut microbiota (HGM) model, consisting of a previously validated four-strain minimal core community ( De Giani et al., 2024 ; Finazzi et al., 2025 ), was supplemented with the probiotic formulation and cultured in the presence of fructooligosaccharides with an average degree of polymerization of approximately 10 (FOS DP ~ 10). Within this framework, the influence of FOS availability on microbial dynamics, metabolic outputs, and transcriptional activation of carbohydrate utilization pathways was investigated across the probiotic consortium, the minimal core, and their combined community. Finally, microbiota metabolites derived from FOS fermentation were evaluated for their capacity to modulate lipid accumulation and MASLD-related gene expression in palmitate-induced steatotic HepG2 cells. 2 Materials and methods 2.1 Bacterial strains and culture conditions The bacterial strains used in this study are listed in Table 1 . Probiotic strains (Lactiplantibacillus plantarum PBS067-DSM 24937, Lactobacillus acidophilus PBS066-DSM 24936, and Limosilactobacillus reuteri PBS072-DSM 25175) were supplied by SynBalance S.r.l (Origgio, Italy) ( Presti et al., 2015 ). Bacterial strains included in the minimal core are Bacteroides cellulosilyticus, Clostridium symbiosum, and Flavonifractor plautii (sourced from BEI Resources, NIAID, NIH collection, as part of the Human Microbiome Project), and Escherichia coli (deriving from the American Type Culture Collection, ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA). Table 1 Bacterial strains included in the human gut reconstructed community used in the study. Strain Source Abbreviation Role in this study Lactiplantibacillus plantarum PBS067 (DSM 24937) Human LP Probiotic Lactobacillus acidophilus PBS066 (DSM 24936) Human LA Probiotic Limosilactobacillus reuteri PBS072 (DSM 25175) Human LR Probiotic Bacteroides cellulosilyticus CL02T12C19 (HM-726) Human BC Minimal core Clostridium symbiosum WAL-14673 (HM-319) Human CS Minimal core Flavonifractor plautii (previously Clostridium orbiscindens) 1_3_50AFAA (HM-303) Human FP Minimal core Escherichia coli ATCC 25922 Human EC Minimal core Probiotic strains were routinely cultured in de Man, Rogosa, and Sharpe (MRS) (Conda Lab, Madrid, Spain) medium supplemented with 0.3% w/v L-cysteine (Merk, Milano, Italy). Minimal core strains were cultured in Reinforced Clostridial Medium (RCM) supplemented with 0.3% w/v L-cysteine and 0.001 % w/v hemin (Hemin chloride, Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). All strains were grown statically under anaerobic conditions generated by the Anaerocult GasPack System (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) at 37 °C. 2.2 Growth assays on FOS Growth assays were performed by cultivating bacteria in 10 mL modified MRS medium (mMRS) supplemented with 0.3% w/v cysteine ( De Giani et al., 2022a ), and either 2% w/v fructooligosaccharides with an average degree of polymerization of 10 (FOS DP ~ 10) or 1% w/v glucose as the sole carbon source. Initially, bacterial strains were inoculated individually (monoculture) with an initial optical density at 600 nm (OD600nm) of 0.1. Subsequently, strains were inoculated at initial OD600nm equal to 0.05 combined to obtain the probiotic consortium (L. plantarum PBS067, L. acidophilus PBS066, and L. reuteri PBS072), the minimal core (F. plautii, C. symbiosum, B. cellulosilyticus, and E. coli), or the whole community (probiotics and minimal core). All setups were grown statically under anaerobic conditions (Anaerocult GasPack System, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) at 37 °C for 24 h (only for probiotic consortium) and 48 h. After incubation, OD600nm was measured, and both cells and supernatants were collected for subsequent DNA, RNA, and metabolite analyses. 2.3 Total DNA extraction and quantification of bacterial strains by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) Genomic DNA was extracted from monocultures using the GeneJET Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. For bacterial consortia, including the probiotic formulation, the minimal core, and the whole community, DNA was extracted by using the Stool Nucleic Acid Isolation kit (Norgen Biotek Corp., Thorold, ON, Canada) according to the manufacturer's instructions with minor modifications ( De Giani et al., 2022b ). Extracted DNA was quantified and assessed for purity using spectrophotometric analysis (NanoDrop One Microvolume UV–Vis Spectrophotometer, ThermoFisher Scientific, Monza, Italy) prior to downstream analysis. Single-strain modulation within the probiotic consortium, the minimal core, and the whole community was quantified by Real-Time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) using PCR Real-Time StepOne Plus (Applied Biosystems, Monza, Italy) and the PowerUp SYBR Green Master mix (Applied Biosystems, Monza, Italy) with species-specific primers ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Absolute quantitation of each bacterial strain was performed using calibration curves from serial dilutions of strain-specific genomic DNA. For each target, standard curves were constructed, and the resulting slope and y-intercept values were used to calculate the bacterial concentration expressed as bacterial counts/mL. Quantitative PCR assays were performed using an initial denaturation step at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s and 65 °C for 1 min (melt curve: 95 °C for 15 s, followed by 60 °C for 1 min, and 95 °C for 15 s). All DNA samples were analyzed in triplicates. 2.4 Gene identification for FOS utilization Genes potentially involved in FOS utilization were identified by using an in silico homology approach. Reference sequences of genes associated with fructan hydrolysis, fructose transport, and intracellular fructose metabolism were retrieved from the literature and from publicly available reference genomes of Lactobacillus strains ( Barrangou et al., 2006 ; Saulnier et al., 2007 ). Sequence comparisons were performed using the selected reference sequences against the genomes of the three probiotic strains by the RAST (Rapid Annotations using Subsystem Technology) server within the NMPDR platform. Candidate genes were identified based on amino acid sequence similarity and the conserved functional domains of the correspondent gene products. Publicly available databases, including NCBI pipeline ( Altschul et al., 1990 ) and UniProt ( The UniProt Consortium, 2025 ), were used for gene validation. 2.5 RNA manipulation and microbial gene expression by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) Total RNA was extracted from 1.5 mL bacterial cultures with OD600nm ~ 3 using the RNeasy PowerSoil Total RNA kit (Qiagen, Milano, Italy) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Extracted DNA was quantified and assessed for purity using spectrophotometric analysis (NanoDrop One Microvolume UV–Vis Spectrophotometer, ThermoFisher Scientific, Monza, Italy) prior to downstream analysis. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized from 500 ng of total RNA using the iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad, Milano, Italy) following the manufacturer's protocol. Gene expression analysis was performed by quantitative RT-qPCR by using cDNA synthesized. RT-qPCR reactions were carried out using PowerUp SYBR Green Master mix (Applied Biosystems, Monza, Italy) on a PCR Real-Time StepOne Plus (Applied Biosystems, Monza, Italy). Relative gene expression levels were calculated using the 2(−ΔΔCt) method. For each sample, target gene expression was normalized to the 16S rRNA gene, which was used as the internal reference control. The same species-specific 16S rRNA primer sets employed for strain quantification were used for normalization ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Primers targeting genes involved in probiotics' FOS utilization were designed in this study based on the corresponding nucleotide sequence identified in the genomes ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Gene expression levels were normalized to the corresponding glucose-grown condition, which served as the reference control. RT-qPCR assays were performed using the same program described for DNA quantification. All reactions were performed in triplicates. 2.6 Microbial metabolite extraction and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis Microbial metabolites were extracted from culture supernatants collected after bacterial growth using ethyl acetate at a 1:2 ratio (Merck, Milano, Italy) following the method reported by De Giani et al. (2022a) . An aliquot of the extracted organic phase was derivatized with N,O-bis(trimethylsilyl)-trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) using a BSTFA:sample ratio equal to 1:3 at 60 °C for 20 min. The derivatized samples (1 μL) were qualitatively analyzed using a gas chromatograph (Technologies 6890 N Network GC System) equipped with a mass selective detector (5973 Network, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Separation was performed on a capillary J&W DB-5ms Ultra Inert GC Column (fused silica, 60 m × 0.25 mm, 0.25 μm, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Splitless injection mode was employed, with 99.99% He as the carrier gas (Sapio, Bergamo, Italy), at 70 eV in full scan mode (40–500 Da). The oven was set as follows: 65 °C for 2 min, followed by 8 °C/min to 110 °C, then 17 °C/min to 260 °C, and held at 260 °C for 10 min. The resulting chromatograms were analyzed using MSD ChemStation E.02.02.1431 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Metabolite identification was achieved by comparison of retention times and mass spectra with those of authentic analytical standards and reference spectra from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) library, considering only library matches with similarity scores ≥90%. 2.7 Cell culture and steatosis induction The HepG2 human liver cancer cell line (ATCC HB-8065) was grown in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with heat-inactivated 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL of penicillin, and 100 μg/mL of streptomycin and maintained at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator. The HepG2 cell line was validated by short tandem repeat profiles that were generated by the simultaneous amplification of multiple short tandem repeat loci and amelogenin (for gender identification). Steatosis was induced in HepG2 cells by adding 0.25 mM palmitic acid (PA) for 24 h. PA-bovine serum albumin (BSA) conjugate was prepared through the soaping of PA with sodium hydroxide and mixing with BSA. Briefly, a 100 mM solution of PA in 0.1 M NaOH was incubated at 70 °C for 30 min, diluted 1:20 with 10% BSA, vortexed for 30 s, and incubated further for 15 min at 55 °C, obtaining a working solution of 5 mM PA. Reagents for cell cultures were supplied by EuroClone (EuroClone S.p.A, Milan, Italy) and chemicals by Merck (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). 2.8 Cell viability assay For the evaluation of cell viability, cells were seeded in 96-well microtiter plates at a density of 1 × 104 cells/well, and 24 h later, treated with 0.1 and 0.5 mg/mL of each extract. After 48 h, cell viability was assessed using an in vitro MTT-based toxicology assay kit according to the manufacturer's protocols (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The absorbance was measured at 570 nm using a Spectrostar Nano Microplate Reader (BMG LABTECH, Ortenberg, Germany). Results were expressed as mean values ± standard error of at least three independent experiments. 2.9 Oil Red O staining of HepG2 cells To determine intracellular lipid accumulation, Oil Red O staining was performed. HepG2 cells were seeded in 24-well plates at a density of 2.5 × 104 cells/well or grown on cover slips in 6-well plates at a density of 1.25 × 105 cells/well, and 24 h later, treated with 0.1 mg/mL for each extract. After 24 h, treatment was removed, and HepG2 cells were stressed with 0.25 mM PA for an additional 24 h to induce steatosis. After treatment, the cells were carefully washed twice with Phosphate Buffer Solution (PBS) and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature. After fixation, cells were washed twice with PBS, stained with 3 mg/mL Oil Red O in 60% aqueous isopropanol for 20 min at room temperature, and then rinsed with PBS. Images were acquired with a Thunder microscope (Leica Microsystems, Milano, Italy) and light microscopy at 10 × magnification, using a Zeiss Axioplan microscope equipped with a digital camera and analyzed with ImageJ software (NIH), and the mean red intensity was quantified and normalized on total cells. 2.10 HepG2 gene expression analysis by RT-qPCR HepG2 cells were seeded in 6-well plates at a density of 2 × 105 cells/well, and 24 h later, treated with 0.1 mg/mL of each extract. After 24 h, treatment was removed, and HepG2 cells were stressed with 0.25 mM PA for further 24 h to induce steatosis. The total RNA was isolated using Quick-RNA TM MiniPrep (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Total RNA was reverse-transcribed using SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), oligo dT and random primers, according to the manufacturer's protocol. For quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR), SYBR Green method was used. Briefly, 50 ng cDNA was PCR amplified with Luna Universal qPCR Master Mix (New England BioLabs, Hitchin, Hertfordshire, UK) and specific primers, using an initial denaturation step at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s and 59 °C annealing for 1 min. Each sample was normalized using the Pol2 gene as an internal reference control. The relative expression level was calculated with the 2(−ΔΔCt) method and was expressed as a relative fold change between treated and untreated cells ( Livak and Schmittgen, 2001 ). The primers used for qPCR are reported in Supplementary Table S3 . 2.11 Statistical analysis Data derived from bacterial growth assays are presented as mean values ± standard error. Statistical significance was assessed using Student's t-test and defined as p-value < 0.05 (*), < 0.01 (**), or < 0.001 (***). Bacterial counts/mL obtained by RT-qPCR analysis are reported as mean values ± standard error. Statistical significance was evaluated using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test and defined as p-value < 0.05 (*), or < 0.01 (**). Data derived from HepG2 cell assays, including lipid accumulation and gene expression analyses under palmitic acid-induced steatosis, are presented as mean values ± standard error. All the experiments were carried out at least in biological triplicate. Statistical analyses have been performed with one-way ANOVA followed by a Dunnett's post hoc test to evaluate the effect compared to FOS 0.1 mg/ml (indicated by *) and one-way ANOVA followed by a Dunnett's post hoc test to evaluate the effect compared to PA 0.25 mM (indicated by #). Results were considered statistically significant at p-value < 0.05 (*), < 0.01 (**), < 0.001 (***), or < 0.0001 (****). 3 Results 3.1 Single-strain growth on FOS DP ~ 10 The ability of individual probiotic and minimal core strains to utilize fructooligosaccharides with an average degree of polymerization of approximately 10 (FOS DP ~ 10) as a carbon source was assessed through growth assays in the presence of FOS DP ~ 10 at a final concentration of 2% w/v or glucose at a final concentration of 1% w/v (reference condition; Figure 1 ). All three Lactobacillus strains, L. plantarum PBS067 (LP), L. acidophilus PBS066 (LA), and L. reuteri PBS072 (LR), were able to grow in the presence of FOS DP ~ 10 (p-value < 0.05 vs. mMRS). LP and LA strains displayed the highest growth performance, reaching OD600nm values around 1.5, while LR showed a more moderate but significant growth (OD600nm 1.2). Similarly, strains constituting the minimal core microbiota, F. plautii (FP), C. symbiosum (CS), B. cellulosilyticus (BC), and E. coli (EC), were able to grow on FOS DP ~ 10 (for FP, CS, and BC, p-value < 0.05 vs. mMRS and for EC, p-value < 0.01 vs. mMRS; Figure 1 ). E. coli exhibited the highest growth (OD600nm around 3.5), consistent with its metabolic versatility and growth rate in carbohydrate-rich media, in contrast, the other strains showed lower but significant growth. All the strains were also able to grow in the presence of glucose (used as a reference condition), showing OD600nm values between ~ 3 and 5 ( Figure 1 ). Figure 1 Growth of the single strains on mineral medium mMRS supplemented with FOS DP ~ 10, with glucose (as reference medium). The growth is presented as the mean value of OD600nm ± standard error. The statistical significance was calculated via Student's t test: *p-value < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Bar chart comparing optical density at six hundred nanometers for seven bacterial strains: LP, LA, LR, BC, FP, CS, and EC. Bars represent three conditions—blue for mMRS plus FOS DP ten two percent, yellow for mMRS plus glucose one percent, and green for mMRS. Yellow bars consistently show the highest values, followed by blue, then green. Statistical significance indicated by asterisks above paired comparisons. Error bars represent standard deviation. Overall, these results indicate that FOS DP ~ 10 supports the growth of both probiotic and minimal core members, while revealing clear strain-specific differences in growth efficiency. 3.2 Modulation of the in vitro reconstructed human gut microbiota in the presence of FOS DP ~ 10 To investigate how substrate availability and microbial dynamics influence the relative abundance of single-strains, strain-specific quantification was performed on DNA extracted after growth on FOS DP ~ 10 growth or glucose (reference condition) after 48 h by RT-qPCR. The bacterial dynamics were assessed on the probiotic consortium alone, the minimal core, and the whole community (composed of the minimal core and the probiotic consortium). In the probiotic consortium grown on FOS DP ~ 10, L. plantarum PBS067 is the predominant strain at 48 h, reaching ~108 bacterial counts/mL, followed by L. reuteri PBS072 (~ 107 bacterial counts/mL; Figure 2A ). In the minimal core, all the strains significantly grow in the presence of FOS DP ~ 10, with E. coli reaching the highest value of bacterial counts/mL (~108) at 48 h ( Figure 2B ). The addition of the probiotic consortium to the minimal core further modulated strain-level dynamics. Indeed, in the whole community, FOS promotes the growth of L. plantarum PBS067, L. reuteri PBS072, and E. coli reaching values of bacterial counts around ~108 at 48 h. B. cellulosilyticus and F. plautii showed values of ~107 bacterial counts/mL ( Figure 2C ). Figure 2 Modulation of the single strains through RT-qPCR. Values of bacterial counts/mL reached by (A) the probiotics, (B) the minimal core, and (C) the whole community during growth on 2% FOS DP ~ 10. Statistical significance was assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test: *p-value < 0.05; **p-value < 0.01. Bar charts illustrating log bacterial counts per milliliter at time zero and forty-eight hours for several bacterial strains. Panel A shows LP, LA, and LR with notable increases, especially LP and LR. Panel B displays BC, FP, CS, and EC, all showing increased counts at forty-eight hours, with EC highest. Panel C combines all strains, highlighting marked increases for LP, LR, and EC, with significant differences indicated by asterisks. Blu stripes on white background bars represent time zero, blue bars represent forty-eight hours. As expected, glucose as a readily fermentable reference substrate, supported the growth of all bacterial strains in the three tested condition as reported in Figure 3 . Figure 3 Modulation of the single strains through RT-qPCR. Values of bacterial counts/mL reached by the (A) probiotics, (B) the minimal core, and (C) the whole community during growth on 1% glucose. Statistical significance was assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test: *p-value < 0.05; **p-value < 0.01. Bar graph figure composed of three panels labeled A, B, and C, each displaying log bacterial counts per milliliter for different bacterial strains at time zero and forty-eight hours, with blue bars representing forty-eight hours and striped bars representing time zero. Panels show increased bacterial counts at forty-eight hours for each strain, with significance indicated by asterisks. Panel A depicts LP, LA, and LR; panel B depicts BC, FP, CS, and EC; and panel C depicts all strains combined. Error bars represent standard deviations. Blue stripes on white background bars represent time zero, blue bars represent forty-eight hours. Overall, these data highlighted that FOS supplied as a prebiotic supported strain-dependent modulation of the probiotic consortium, which is amplified under community conditions. 3.3 Identification of genes potentially involved in FOS DP ~ 10 by Lactobacillus strains To investigate the genetic basis of FOS DP ~ 10 utilization by the probiotic strains, a targeted homology-gene identification approach was performed using reference sequences previously described for FOS and sucrose metabolism in Lactobacillus sp. Comparative genomic analysis enabled the identification of genes putatively involved in FOS uptake and intracellular catabolism across the three strains included in the probiotic formulation. In L. plantarum PBS067, putative genes were identified through comparative genomic analysis with the reference strain, L. plantarum WCFS1 ( Saulnier et al., 2007 ) ( Figure 4A ), consistent with previously described sucrose/FOS utilization pathways. The genes comprise a fructose-specific phosphotransferase system (PTS, pts1BCA), a β-fructofuranosidase (sacA), a transcriptional regulator (sacR), and a fructokinase (sacK1). Figure 4 (A) Comparison of genes identified in probiotic strains (L. plantarum PBS067, L. reuteri PBS072, and L. acidophilus PBS066) putatively involved in sucrose/FOS utilization with reference strains. Genes encoding fructose/sucrose phosphotransferase system (PTS) components (pts1BCA or scrA), β-fructofuranosidase (sacA or scrB), transcriptional regulators (sacR or scrR), fructokinase (sack1), and related enzymes are highlighted. (B) Schematic representation of the predicted sucrose/FOS metabolic pathway in Lactobacillus spp. illustrating the uptake of sucrose/FOS, intracellular hydrolysis into fructose and glucose-6-phosphate, and subsequent entry into central carbon metabolism. Enzymatic steps associated with the genes identified in panel (A) are indicated with the same color. Red arrows indicate genes selected for expression analysis. Panel A shows gene clusters related to sucrose metabolism in different Lactobacillus strains, with arrows colored by gene type and direction. Panel B presents a labeled metabolic pathway diagram where sucrose is transported by fructose PTS, converted to sucrose-6-phosphate, then split by β-fructofuranosidase into fructose and glucose-6-phosphate; fructose is phosphorylated by fructokinase to fructose-6-phosphate, both products enter glycolysis. A scale bar marks 0.5 kilobases in panel A. In L. reuteri PBS072, a fructokinase-encoding gene was identified, whereas other components of the canonical FOS utilization operon were not detected ( Supplementary Table S4 ). By comparing the reference strain, L. acidophilus NCFM ( Barrangou et al., 2006 ) with L. acidophilus PBS066, homologous genes encoding components of the sucrose/fructose utilization system were identified. These genes comprise a fructose-specific phosphotransferase system (scrA), a β-fructofuranosidase (scrB), and a transcriptional regulator (scrR; Figure 4A , Supplementary Table S4 ). A schematic overview of the predicted sucrose/FOS metabolic pathway and the enzymatic steps associated with the identified genes is shown in Figure 4B . Collectively, these data demonstrate species-specific differences in the genetic architecture associated with FOS utilization pathways among the probiotic strains. Based on these findings, key genes involved in FOS uptake and metabolism were selected for subsequent expression analysis under different growth conditions and levels of microbial complexity. 3.4 Transcriptional analysis of FOS utilization genes in Lactobacillus strains The expression of selected genes was analyzed by RT-qPCR in L. plantarum PBS067, L. acidophilus PBS066, and L. reuteri PBS072 grown as single-strain cultures ( Figure 5 ), within the probiotic consortium ( Figure 6A ), and in the whole community in the presence of FOS (DP ~ 10), compared with glucose-grown condition at 48 h ( Figure 6B ). Figure 5 Expression of genes involved in sucrose/FOS metabolism in L. plantarum PBS067, L. reuteri PBS072, and L. acidophilus PBS066 upon growth on 2% FOS DP ~ 10 at 48 h. Gene expression was assessed by RT-qPCR and normalized to strain-specific 16S rRNA reference genes. Data are reported as 2(−ΔΔCt) ± standard deviation. Horizontal bar chart showing gene expression (2^(-ΔΔCt)) for LA_ScrB, LR_Sack1, LP_SacA, and LP_Sack1 at 48 hours, with LA_ScrB and LR_Sack1 having values near 15, LP_Sack1 around 5, and LP_SacA close to zero. Error bars are included for each gene measurement. Figure 6 Expression of probiotic genes involved in sucrose/FOS metabolism in (A) the probiotic consortium, and (B) the reconstructed whole community upon growth on 2% FOS DP ~ 10 at 48 h. Gene expression was assessed by RT-qPCR and normalized to strain-specific 16S rRNA reference genes. Data are reported as 2(−ΔΔCt) ± standard deviation. Two horizontal bar charts labeled A and B show gene expression levels after forty-eight hours for four genes: LA_ScrB, LR_Sack1, LP_SacA, and LP_Sack1. In panel A, LR_Sack1 shows the highest expression, while the other genes are near zero. In panel B, LP_Sack1 has the highest expression, followed by LP_SacA, LR_Sack1, and LA_ScrB, all with smaller values. Error bars appear for each measurement. Considering the monocultures, LP displayed a transcriptional activation of the β-fructokinase gene sacK1 ( Figure 5 ). In contrast, the expression of the fructofuranosidase gene sacA was not detected. However, additional analyses revealed that both genes (sacA and sacK1) are expressed at 24 h ( Supplementary Figure S1 ), suggesting a temporal regulation of the pathway. In LA and LR, the expression of respectively scrB and sacK1 was detected at 48 h during growth on FOS ( Figure 5 ). In the probiotic consortium, sacA and sacK1 from LP and scrB from LA ( Figure 6A ) were not expressed at 48 h. In contrast, sacK1 from LR maintained expression levels comparable to those observed in single-strain culture ( Figure 6A ). Interestingly, the differential expression of LP genes (sacA and sacK1) between the monoculture and the probiotic consortium at 48 h suggests that interspecies interactions modulate the transcriptional regulation of FOS utilization pathways. Notably, both sacA and sacK1 were expressed at 24 h within the consortium ( Supplementary Figure S2 ), indicating a shift in temporal expression dynamics. In the reconstructed microbial community at 48 h, all FOS-related genes identified in the probiotic strains were expressed, with the exception of scrB from LA ( Figure 6B ). Consistent with growth data, the absence of scrB expression likely reflects the limited growth of LA under these conditions ( Figure 2A ). In contrast, genes from LP and LR were expressed, indicating their contribution to FOS-related carbohydrate metabolism wthin the broader microbial consortium. Overall, these results demonstrate that the transcriptional activation of FOS-related metabolic pathway is strongly influenced by microbial context, and time, with gene expression patterns differing between monoculture, probiotic consortium, and the reconstructed microbial community, rather than being constitutively driven by gene presence alone. 3.5 Production of bacterial metabolites and SCFAs To characterize the metabolic profiles associated with FOS utilization, metabolites produced by the probiotic formulation, the minimal core, and the reconstructed microbial community were analyzed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS; Figure 7 ). Figure 7 Chromatogram profiles of bacterial metabolites by GC-MSD after 2% FOS DP ~ 10 fermentation. Metabolites produced by (A) probiotic consortium, (B) minimal core, and (C) the whole community. Three chromatograms labeled A, B, and C display abundance versus retention time from 5 to 20 minutes, each with numbered peaks. A legend associates each retention time with corresponding carboxylic acids, including acetic, propionic, lactic, pentanoic, butyric, butanedioic, benzenpropanoic, and hexadecanoic acids. In the probiotic formulation, the metabolic profile showed typical fermentation products of lactobacilli, including acetic acid (peak 1, Rt 6.08), lactic acid (peak 3, Rt 9.48 min), and succinic acid (peak 6, Rt 12.65 min; Figure 7A ). The minimal core displayed a distinct metabolite spectrum that included propanoic acid (peak 2, Rt. 9.45 min), butyric acid (peak 5, Rt 12.20 min), and succinic acid (peak 6, Rt. 12.65; Figure 7B ). The whole reconstructed microbial community exhibited a broader metabolite profile with a greater number and diversity of detected compounds ( Figure 7C ). In addition, metabolite profiling was also performed on cultures grown on glucose (reference condition; Supplementary Figure S3 ). Overall, glucose-grown cultures displayed metabolite profiles quite similar to those observed on FOS. 3.6 Effects on HepG2 cells with palmitic acid-induced steatosis The human hepatocarcinoma HepG2 cell line exposed to palmitic acid (PA) can be used as an in vitro model of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) ( Ramos et al., 2022 ). A 24-h treatment with 0.25 mM PA is sufficient to cause a significant accumulation of lipid droplets in the cells, as shown by the specific Oil Red O staining for lipid droplets, without reducing more than 50% cell viability, thus allowing the real effect of the samples to be evaluated while minimizing confounding effects due to cell death mechanisms ( Supplementary Figure S4 ). To investigate whether the extract of bacterial metabolites could protect hepatic cells from steatosis, HepG2 cells were firstly pre-treated for 24 h with bacterial metabolites derived from probiotic consortium, minimal core, and whole community grown on 2% FOS DP ~ 10 and then exposed to 0.25 mM PA for further 24 h for steatosis induction. Cells pre-treated with 0.1 mg/mL FOS DP ~ 10 or bacterial metabolites derived from minimal core showed the same lipid accumulation of steatotic cells; while a significantly lower intracellular lipid accumulation was found in cells pre-treated with 0.1 mg/mL bacterial metabolites derived from probiotic consortium and whole community compared to both steatotic HepG2 cells and FOS DP ~ 10 ( Figures 8 , 9 ). Subsequently, to understand if this reduction in lipid droplets was due to changes in fatty acid metabolism, we evaluated the expression levels of SREBP and PPARα, two key lipid metabolism regulators, ACC, Fasn and HMGCR, coding for the anabolic enzymes acetyl-CoA carboxylase, fatty acid synthase and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase, respectively, and Cd36, a critical fatty acids sensor and lipid transporter inside the cell. Steatotic cells showed a significantly higher mRNA level of Cd36 compared to untreated cells, with no changes in the other genes analyzed ( Supplementary Figure S4D ). The expression level of this gene was also investigated in cells pre-treated with bacterial metabolites. HepG2 cells pre-treated with 0.1 mg/mL bacterial metabolites derived from probiotic formulation and whole community showed a reduction of Cd36 mRNA level compared to steatotic cells and cells pre-treated with FOS DP ~ 10, or bacterial metabolites derived from minimal core cells in a trend similar to the one of intracellular lipid content ( Figure 10 ). Figure 8 Images of not-treated and 24 h-pre-treated HepG2 cells using 0.1 mg/mL of bacterial metabolites derived from probiotic consortium grown on 2% FOS DP ~ 10 and then exposed to 0.25 mM PA for further 24 h for steatosis induction. Images were taken with Thunder microscope (Leica Microsystems) at 40 × magnification. Scale bar: 10 μm. Microscopy images display cellular samples stained red under different conditions: top shows PA zero millimolar, bottom row shows PA zero point two five millimolar with FOS and Probiotics treatments, illustrating cellular morphology and staining differences. Figure 9 Effect of the extract of bacterial metabolites on HepG2 cells with palmitic acid-induced steatosis. The figure shows lipid accumulation in HepG2 cells treated for 24 h with 0.1 mg/mL of bacterial metabolites derived from probiotic consortium, minimal core, and whole community grown on 2% FOS DP ~ 10 and then exposed to 0.25 mM PA for further 24 h for steatosis induction. Values are represented as mean red intensity percentage ± standard error. Statistical analyses have been performed with one-way ANOVA followed by a Dunnett's post hoc test to evaluate the effect compared to FOS 0.1 mg/ml (indicated by *) and one-way ANOVA followed by a Dunnett's post hoc test to evaluate the effect compared to PA 0.25 mM (indicated by #). Statistical significances were at p-value < 0.05 (*), < 0.01 (**), < 0.001 (***), or < 0.0001 (****). Bar graph comparing mean red intensity percentages relative to NT across six groups: NT, PA zero point two five millimolar, FOS, Probiotics FOS, Minimal core FOS, and Whole community FOS, with
significance indicated by asterisks (****) and hashes (####) across several comparisons. Error bars represent standard error. Figure 10 Effect of the extract of bacterial metabolites on HepG2 cells with palmitic acid-induced steatosis. The figure shows Cd36 gene expression levels in HepG2 cells treated for 24 h with 0.1 mg/mL of bacterial metabolites derived from probiotic consortium, minimal core, and whole community grown on 2% FOS DP ~ 10 and then exposed to 0.25 mM PA for further 24 h for steatosis induction. Values are represented as mean fold respect to control ± standard error. Statistical analyses have been performed with one-way ANOVA followed by a Dunnett's post hoc test to evaluate the effect compared to FOS 0.1 mg/ml (indicated by *) and one-way ANOVA followed by a Dunnett's post hoc test to evaluate the effect compared to PA 0.25 mM (indicated by #). Statistical significances were at p-value < 0.05 (*), < 0.01 (**), < 0.001 (***), or < 0.0001 (****). Bar graph showing Cd36 mRNA levels (fold respect to control) across six groups: NT, PA 0.25 mM, FOS, Probiotics FOS, Minimal core FOS, and Whole community FOS. PA 0.25 mM and FOS groups show increased Cd36 mRNA compared to NT and Minimal core FOS, with significance indicated by stars (****) and hashes (####) across several comparisons. Error bars represent standard error. 4 Discussion The present study suggests that the modulation of FOS-driven microbial metabolism by a Lactobacillus probiotic formulation influences the hepatocyte lipid accumulation within a simplified and defined human gut microbiota-host in vitro framework. This reductionistic system was applied to a seven-species microbial community comprising a three Lactobacillus species representing the probiotic consortium and four microbial species selected as representatives of the commensal core, to better evaluate the functional groups of the gut microbiota. By integrating strain-level dynamics, transcriptional regulation, metabolic profiling, functional effects on hepatocytes, and MASLD-related gene expression, the present multi-layered study shows how the probiotic-driven microbial activity may shape host lipid metabolism. Growth analyses demonstrated that FOS DP ~ 10 supports cell growth of both probiotic strains and minimal core members, although with strain-dependent efficiency. Across microbial setups, FOS promoted a differentiation among probiotic Lactobacillus strains, with higher bacterial cell levels of L. plantarum PBS067 and L. reuteri PBS072. This finding suggests that substrate complexity can modulate the microbial community and the strain specific responses, in agreement with previous reports describing the ability of lactobacilli to metabolize medium-chain FOS ( Li et al., 2015 ; Yao et al., 2022 ). Transcriptional analysis revealed probiotic species-specific differences in the gene expression for FOS utilization pathways, supporting the ability of these microorganisms to utilize this carbon source. This is in line with literature reporting that Lactobacillus FOS metabolism is often encoded by genes reflecting ecological adaptation and niche-specific carbohydrate utilization strategies ( Saulnier et al., 2007 ; Chen et al., 2015 ; Cui et al., 2021 ; Barrangou et al., 2003 ). The identification of genes involved in FOS metabolism in L. plantarum is consistent with its higher growth performances. On the other hand, L. acidophilus and L. reuteri were not preponderant in FOS DP ~ 10 utilization which is often mirrored by gene variable profiles depending on the carbon source ( Huang et al., 2021 ; Andersen et al., 2012 ; Frese et al., 2011 ; Spinler et al., 2014 ). The partial FOS-related genetic repertoire identified in L. reuteri reflects the evolutionary specialization previously described for this species ( Frese et al., 2011 ; Spinler et al., 2014 ). The modulation of sacA, scrB, and sacK1 expression across monoculture, probiotic consortium, and the whole community conditions indicates that interspecies interactions influence carbohydrate metabolic activity, likely through competition and metabolic cross-feeding. Metabolic assessment demonstrated that FOS fermentation produced metabolite profiles typical of carbohydrate fermentation, including short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and organic acids such as lactic, propanoic, butyric, and succinic acid. These results align with previous reports indicating that microbial fermentation of different carbohydrates can converge toward common SCFAs and organic acids that can exert systemic metabolic effects ( Louis and Flint, 2017 ; Morrison and Preston, 2016 ). Interestingly, the reconstructed community exhibited a broader metabolite diversity, reflecting increased metabolic interactions within the Lactobacillus consortium which may represent a configuration associated with enhanced microbial metabolic interplay, although its relevance to in vivo gut health requires further investigation. Although it is known that FOS, as a prebiotic supplementation, is generally associated with promoting SCFA production in vivo system ( De Giani et al., 2022b ), the SCFA profiles observed under FOS and glucose conditions in the present study likely reflect intrinsic methodological constraint of the in vitro batch fermentation system. In our experimental setup, both substrates are directly accessible to the human reconstructed microbial community, and no host-mediated absorption or spatial compartmentalization occurs. Unlike in vivo conditions, where glucose is rapidly absorbed in the upper gastrointestinal tract and does not typically reach the colon in significant amounts ( Gray, 1970 ), in vitro systems allow glucose to remain available for microbial fermentation throughout the incubation period. Therefore, in our study, glucose was used only as a fermentable reference carbon source, whereas FOS was included as a prebiotic substrate to assess its potential to selectively support probiotic growth and metabolic activity under conditions that may better advise future in vivo applications. While the reductionist in vitro model effectively captures the reconstructed microbial metabolic potential, it may not reproduce physiological dynamics of substrate availability, and host-microbiota interactions, underestimating substrate-specific effects that are driven by host physiology in vivo. Microbial-derived metabolites are known to influence host lipid metabolism through multiple mechanisms. SCFAs, in particular, have been shown to regulate hepatic lipid homeostasis by modulating AMPK activation, inhibiting lipogenesis pathways such as SREBP-1c signaling, and improving insulin sensitivity. These mechanisms collectively reduce hepatic lipid accumulation and improve metabolic homeostasis ( Xavier-Santos et al., 2020 ; Torres et al., 2019 ). In line with these mechanisms, pretreatment of palmitate-stressed HepG2 cells with bacterial metabolites derived from probiotic fermentation resulted in reduced intracellular lipid accumulation. This supports the hypothesis that microbial metabolic products may contribute to changes in hepatocyte lipid handling. Importantly, metabolite treatment also reduced expression of Cd36, a key fatty acid transporter involved in hepatic lipid uptake. Cd36 plays a central role in hepatic steatosis by facilitating long-chain fatty acid transport into hepatocytes, and its upregulation has been consistently associated with MASLD progression and lipid accumulation ( Miquilena-Colina et al., 2011 ). Therefore, the observed reduction in Cd36 transcript levels suggests its involvement in fatty acid transport when microbial metabolites are administered; this may be associated to the reduction of lipid accumulation into hepatocytes under lipotoxic conditions ( Rada et al., 2020 ). While direct causality cannot be established within the present model, the concordance between reduced lipid accumulation and lower Cd36 transcript levels suggests that microbiota-derived metabolites may modulate hepatic lipid handling under lipotoxic conditions. These results are consistent with current evidence indicating that gut microbiota-derived metabolites contribute to the link between dietary substrates and host cell metabolic regulation ( Tilg et al., 2016 ; Tripathi et al., 2018 ). Overall, the study is subject to inherent limitations, including the simplified microbial composition relative to native gut ecosystems and the constraints of an in vitro hepatocyte model, which does not fully recapitulate systemic host responses. Likewise, the reductionist nature of the model allows a more detailed understanding of how the microbial interactions modulate the whole community at strain level and how the microbial metabolic profile influences the microbial community. However, the specific metabolites responsible for the observed effect on host cells were not identified based on the utilized approach of the study. Although the reductionist reconstructed microbiota model used here allows controlled investigation of strain-level interactions and FOS-driven metabolic drivers, it does not reproduce the taxonomic complexity, donor-specific variability, spatial organization, intestinal barrier function, or host-mediated processes occurring in vivo. Future studies should therefore evaluate these findings using more complex and physiologically relevant in vitro models, including donor-derived microbiota-based approaches such as RapidAIM, dynamic gut fermentation systems, and integrated gut-liver platforms to validate the mechanistic insights. In conclusion, these findings suggest that FOS-driven metabolism within a defined Lactobacillus reconstructed microbiota may contribute to influence host metabolic responses by shaping microbial metabolic profiles and may be associated with reduced lipid accumulation in steatotic HepG2 cells. However, the observed effects should be interpreted as metabolite-associated responses in a reductionist model and require validation in more complex gut-liver systems. Acknowledgments We would like to thank SynBalance S.r.l for supplying probiotic strains from their collection. We would like to thank also for the support of a postdoctoral research fellow funded by Fondazione Fratelli Confalonieri at the University of Milano-Bicocca for Federica Bovio. Edited by: Moshe Shemesh , Agricultural Research Organization (ARO), Israel Reviewed by: Congyang Mao , Hubei University, China Seema Nair Parvathy , Western University, Canada Data availability statement The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/ Supplementary material , further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author. Author contributions MFi: Conceptualization, Investigation, Visualization, Writing – original draft. FB: Investigation, Visualization, Writing – original draft. MFo: Methodology, Supervision, Validation, Writing – original draft. ML: Methodology, Software, Supervision, Writing – original draft. PF: Project administration, Resources, Writing – review & editing. JZ: Data curation, Methodology, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. PD: Conceptualization, Project administration, Resources, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Conflict of interest The author(s) declared that this work was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Generative AI statement The author(s) declared that Generative AI was not used in the creation of this manuscript. Any alternative text (alt text) provided alongside figures in this article has been generated by Frontiers with the support of artificial intelligence and reasonable efforts have been made to ensure accuracy, including review by the authors wherever possible. If you identify any issues, please contact us. Publisher's note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Supplementary material The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2026.1866842/full#supplementary-material Supplementary Figure S1 Expression of genes involved in sucrose/FOS metabolism in L. plantarum PBS067 during growth as single strain on 2% FOS DP ~ 10 at 24 h. Gene expression was assessed by RT-qPCR and normalized to strain-specific 16S rRNA reference genes. Data are reported as 2(−ΔΔCt) ± standard deviation. Supplementary Figure S2 Expression of probiotic genes involved in sucrose/FOS metabolism in the probiotic consortium during growth on 2% FOS DP ~ 10 at 24 h. Gene expression was assessed by RT-qPCR and normalized to strain-specific 16S rRNA reference genes. Data are reported as 2(−ΔΔCt) ± standard deviation. Supplementary Figure S3 Chromatogram profiles of bacterial metabolites by GC-MSD after upon on 1% glucose. Metabolites produced by (A) probiotic consortium, (B) minimal core, and (C) the whole community. Supplementary Figure S4 (A) Viability of HepG2 cells treated with 0.25 mM palmitic acid for 24 h. Values are represented as mean value percentage of vitality ± standard error. (B) Lipid accumulation in HepG2 cells treated with 0.25 mM palmitic acid for 24 h. Values are represented as mean red intensity percentage ± standard error. (C) Light microscopy images at 40 × magnification (scale bar: 10 μm) of non-treated cells and cells treated for 24 h with 0.25 mM palmitic acid. (D) Expression of genes potentially involved in MASLD (SREB, ACC, Fasn, PPARα, HMGCR, Cd36) in HepG2 cells treated with 0.25 mM palmitic acid for 24 h. Values are represented as mean fold respect to control ± standard error. Statistical differences were calculated using Student's t-test: *p-value < 0.05, **p-value < 0.01, ***p-value < 0.001, ****p-value < 0.0001. Supplementary Table S1 Species-specific primers used in this study. Supplementary Table S2 Primers used in this study to analyse FOS gene expression. Supplementary Table S3 Primers used in this study to analyse HepG2 gene expression. Supplementary Table S4 Probiotics genes identified in this study. References Abenavoli L.
 Boccuto L.
 Federico A.
 Dallio M.
 Loguercio C.
 Di Renzo L.
 . ( 2019 ). Diet and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: the Mediterranean way . Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
 16 : 3011 . doi: 10.3390/ijerph16173011 31438482 PMC6747511 Altschul S. F.
 Gish W
 Miller W.
 Myers E. W.
 Lipman D. J. ( 1990 ). Basic local alignment search tool . J. Mol. Biol . 215 , 403 – 410 . doi: 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80360-2 2231712 Andersen J. M.
 Barrangou R.
 Hachem M. A.
 Lahtinen S. J.
 Goh Y. J.
 Svensson B.
 . ( 2012 ). Transcriptional analysis of prebiotic uptake and catabolism by Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM . PLos ONE
 7 : e44409 . doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044409 23028535 PMC3446993 Barrangou R.
 Altermann E.
 Hutkins R.
 Cano R.
 Klaenhammer T. R. ( 2003 ). Functional and comparative genomic analyses of an operon involved in fructooligosaccharide utilization by Lactobacillus acidophilus . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
 100 , 8957 – 8962 . doi: 10.1073/pnas.1332765100 12847288 PMC166420 Barrangou R.
 Azcarate-Peril M. A.
 Duong T.
 Conners S. B.
 Kelly R. M.
 Klaenhammer T. R. ( 2006 ). Global analysis of carbohydrate utilization by Lactobacillus acidophilus using cDNA microarrays . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
 103 , 3816 – 3821 . doi: 10.1073/pnas.0511287103 16505367 PMC1533782 Bayer G.
 Ganobis C. M.
 Allen-Vercoe E.
 Philpott D. J. ( 2021 ). Defined gut microbial communities: promising tools to understand and combat disease . Microbes Infect.
 23 : 104816 . doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2021.104816 33785422 Benedict M.
 Zhang X. ( 2017 ). Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: an expanded review . World J. Hepatol.
 9 : 715 . doi: 10.4254/wjh.v9.i16.715 28652891 PMC5468341 Bindels L. B.
 Delzenne N. M.
 Cani P. D.
 Walter J. ( 2015 ). Towards a more comprehensive concept for prebiotics . Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.
 12 , 303 – 310 . doi: 10.1038/nrgastro.2015.47 25824997 Canfora E. E.
 Meex R. C.
 Venema K.
 Blaak E. E. ( 2019 ). Gut microbial metabolites in obesity, NAFLD and T2DM . Nat. Rev. Endocrinol.
 15 , 261 – 273 . doi: 10.1038/s41574-019-0156-z 30670819 Cani P. D.
 Neyrinck A. M.
 Fava F.
 Knauf C.
 Burcelin R. G.
 Tuohy K. M.
 . ( 2007 ). Selective increases of bifidobacteria in gut microflora improve high-fat-diet-induced diabetes in mice through a mechanism associated with endotoxaemia . Diabetologia
 50 , 2374 – 2383 . doi: 10.1007/s00125-007-0791-0 17823788 Cao F.
 Ding Q.
 Zhuge H.
 Lai S.
 Chang K.
 Le C.
 . ( 2023 ). Lactobacillus plantarum ZJUIDS14 alleviates non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in mice in association with modulation in the gut microbiota . Front. Nutr.
 9 : 1071284 . doi: 10.3389/fnut.2022.1071284 36698477 PMC9868733 Chen C.
 Zhao G.
 Chen W.
 Guo B. ( 2015 ). Metabolism of fructooligosaccharides in Lactobacillus plantarum ST-III via differential gene transcription and alteration of cell membrane fluidity . Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
 81 , 7697 – 7707 . doi: 10.1128/AEM.02426-15 26319882 PMC4616932 Cui Y.
 Wang M.
 Zheng Y.
 Miao K.
 Qu X. ( 2021 ). The carbohydrate metabolism of Lactiplantibacillus plantarum . Int. J. Mol. Sci.
 22 : 13452 . doi: 10.3390/ijms222413452 34948249 PMC8704671 De Giani A.
 Oldani M.
 Forcella M.
 Lasagni M.
 Fusi P.
 Di Gennaro P. ( 2022a ). Synergistic antioxidant effect of prebiotic ginseng berries extract and probiotic strains on healthy and tumoral colorectal cell lines . Int. J. Mol. Sci.
 24 : 373 . doi: 10.3390/ijms24010373 36613815 PMC9820163 De Giani A.
 Perillo F.
 Baeri A.
 Finazzi M.
 Facciotti F.
 Di Gennaro P. ( 2024 ). Positive modulation of a new reconstructed human gut microbiota by Maitake extract helpfully boosts the intestinal environment in vitro . PLoS ONE
 19 : e0301822 . doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0301822 38603764 PMC11008829 De Giani A.
 Sandionigi A.
 Zampolli J.
 Michelotti A.
 Tursi F.
 Labra M.
 . ( 2022b ). Effects of inulin-based prebiotics alone or in combination with probiotics on human gut microbiota and markers of immune system: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study in healthy subjects . Microorganisms
 10 : 1256 . doi: 10.3390/microorganisms10061256 35744774 PMC9229734 De Roy K.
 Marzorati M.
 Van den Abbeele P.
 Van de Wiele T.
 Boon N. ( 2014 ). Synthetic microbial ecosystems: an exciting tool to understand and apply microbial communities . Environ. Microbiol.
 16 , 1472 – 1481 . doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12343 24274586 Déjean G.
 Tamura K.
 Cabrera A.
 Jain N.
 Pudlo N. A.
 Pereira G.
 . ( 2020 ). Synergy between cell surface glycosidases and glycan-binding proteins dictates the utilization of specific beta (1, 3)-glucans by human gut Bacteroides . MBio.
 11 , 10 – 1128 . doi: 10.1128/mBio.00095-20 32265336 PMC7157763 Delzenne N. M.
 Neyrinck A. M.
 Bäckhed F.
 Cani P. D. ( 2011 ). Targeting gut microbiota in obesity: effects of prebiotics and probiotics . Nat. Rev. Endocrinol.
 7 , 639 – 646 . doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2011.126 21826100 Eslam M.
 Newsome P. N.
 Sarin S. K.
 Anstee Q. M.
 Targher G.
 Romero-Gomez M.
 . ( 2020 ). A new definition for metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease: an international expert consensus statement . J. Hepatol.
 73 , 202 – 209 . doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2020.03.039 32278004 Fang Y. L.
 Chen H.
 Wang C. L.
 Liang L. ( 2018 ). Pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in children and adolescence: from “two hit theory” to “multiple hit model” . World J. Gastroenterol.
 24 : 2974 . doi: 10.3748/wjg.v24.i27.2974 30038464 PMC6054950 Finazzi M.
 Bovio F.
 Forcella M.
 Lasagni M.
 Fusi P.
 Di Gennaro P. ( 2025 ). Beneficial effects of in vitro reconstructed human gut microbiota by ginseng extract fermentation on intestinal cell lines . Microorganisms
 13 : 192 . doi: 10.3390/microorganisms13010192 39858960 PMC11768043 Frese S. A.
 Benson A. K.
 Tannock G. W.
 Loach D. M.
 Kim J.
 Zhang M.
 . ( 2011 ). The evolution of host specialization in the vertebrate gut symbiont Lactobacillus reuteri . PLoS Genet.
 7 : e1001314 . doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001314 21379339 PMC3040671 Gray G. M. ( 1970 ). Carbohydrate digestion and absorption . Gastroenterology
 58 , 96 – 107 . doi: 10.1016/S0016-5085(70)80098-1 4903350 Huang W.
 Wang G.
 Xia Y.
 Xiong Z.
 Ai L. ( 2020 ). Bile salt hydrolase-overexpressing Lactobacillus strains can improve hepatic lipid accumulation in vitro in an NAFLD cell model . Food Nutr. Res . 12:64. doi: 10.29219/fnr.v64.3751 33281535 PMC7681781 Huang X.
 Chen Q.
 Fan Y.
 Yang R.
 Gong G.
 Yan C.
 . ( 2023 ). Fructooligosaccharides attenuate non-alcoholic fatty liver disease by remodeling gut microbiota and association with lipid metabolism . Biomed. Pharmacother.
 159 : 114300 . doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114300 36696803 Huang Z.
 Zhou X.
 Stanton C.
 Ross R. P.
 Zhao J.
 Zhang H.
 . ( 2021 ). Comparative genomics and specific functional characteristics analysis of Lactobacillus acidophilus . Microorganisms
 9 : 1992 . doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9091992 34576887 PMC8464880 Huijsdens X. W.
 Linskens R. K.
 Mak M.
 Meuwissen S. G.
 Vandenbroucke-Grauls C. M.
 Savelkoul P. H. ( 2002 ). Quantification of bacteria adherent to gastrointestinal mucosa by real-time PCR . J. Clin. Microbiol.
 40 , 4423 – 4427 . doi: 10.1128/JCM.40.12.4423-4427.2002 12454130 PMC154607 Kobyliak N.
 Conte C.
 Cammarota G.
 Haley A. P.
 Styriak I.
 Gaspar L.
 . ( 2016 ). Probiotics in prevention and treatment of obesity: a critical view . Nutr. Metab.
 13 : 14 . doi: 10.1186/s12986-016-0067-0 26900391 PMC4761174 Li W.
 Wang K.
 Sun Y.
 Ye H.
 Hu B.
 Zeng X. ( 2015 ). Influences of structures of galactooligosaccharides and fructooligosaccharides on the fermentation in vitro by human intestinal microbiota . J. Funct. Foods
 13 , 158 – 168 . doi: 10.1016/j.jff.2014.12.044 Livak K. J.
 Schmittgen T. D. ( 2001 ). Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2–ΔΔCT method . Methods
 25 , 402 – 408 . doi: 10.1006/meth.2001.1262 11846609 Louis P.
 Flint H. J. ( 2017 ). Formation of propionate and butyrate by the human colonic microbiota . Environ. Microbiol.
 19 , 29 – 41 . doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.13589 27928878 Ma Q.
 Liu K.
 Chang C.
 Wang L.
 Shen Z.
 Li J.
 . ( 2025 ). Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease: pathogenesis, model and treatment . Int. J. Mol. Med.
 56 : 227 . doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2025.5668 41104870 PMC12549077 Markowiak P.
 Sliżewska K. ( 2017 ). Effects of probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics on human health . Nutrients
 9 : 1021 . doi: 10.3390/nu9091021 28914794 PMC5622781 Miquilena-Colina M. E.
 Lima-Cabello E.
 Sánchez-Campos S.
 García-Mediavilla M. V.
 Fernández-Bermejo M.
 Lozano-Rodríguez T.
 . ( 2011 ). Hepatic fatty acid translocase CD36 upregulation is associated with insulin resistance, hyperinsulinaemia and increased steatosis in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis and chronic hepatitis C . Gut
 60 , 1394 – 1402 . doi: 10.1136/gut.2010.222844 21270117 Morrison D. J.
 Preston T. ( 2016 ). Formation of short chain fatty acids by the gut microbiota and their impact on human metabolism . Gut Microbes
 7 , 189 – 200 . doi: 10.1080/19490976.2015.1134082 26963409 PMC4939913 Mularczyk M.
 Bourebaba Y.
 Kowalczuk A.
 Marycz K.
 Bourebaba L. ( 2021 ). Probiotics-rich emulsion improves insulin signalling in Palmitate/Oleate-challenged human hepatocarcinoma cells through the modulation of Fetuin-A/TLR4-JNK-NF-κB pathway . Biomed. Pharmacother.
 139 : 111560 . doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.111560 33839491 Park E. J.
 Lee Y. S.
 Kim S. M.
 Park G. S.
 Lee Y. H.
 Jeong D. Y.
 . ( 2020 ). Beneficial effects of Lactobacillus plantarum strains on non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in high fat/high fructose diet-fed rats . Nutrients
 12 : 542 . doi: 10.3390/nu12020542 32093158 PMC7071439 Presti I.
 D'orazio G.
 Labra M.
 La Ferla B.
 Mezzasalma V.
 Bizzaro G.
 . ( 2015 ). Evaluation of the probiotic properties of new Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium strains and their in vitro effect . Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
 99 , 5613 – 5626 . doi: 10.1007/s00253-015-6482-8 25744647 Rada P.
 González-Rodríguez Á.
 García-Monzón C.
 Valverde Á. M. ( 2020 ). Understanding lipotoxicity in NAFLD pathogenesis: is CD36 a key driver? . Cell Death Dis.
 11 : 802 . doi: 10.1038/s41419-020-03003-w 32978374 PMC7519685 Ramos M. J.
 Bandiera L.
 Menolascina F.
 Fallowfield J. A. ( 2022 ). In vitro models for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: emerging platforms and their applications . Iscience
 25 : 103549 . doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103549 34977507 PMC8689151 Sanders M. E.
 Merenstein D. J.
 Reid G.
 Gibson G. R.
 Rastall R. A. ( 2019 ). Probiotics and prebiotics in intestinal health and disease: from biology to the clinic . Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.
 16 , 605 – 616 . doi: 10.1038/s41575-019-0173-3 31296969 Saulnier D. M.
 Molenaar D.
 de Vos W. M.
 Gibson G. R.
 Kolida S. ( 2007 ). Identification of prebiotic fructooligosaccharide metabolism in Lactobacillus plantarum WCFS1 through microarrays . Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
 73 , 1753 – 1765 . doi: 10.1128/AEM.01151-06 17261521 PMC1828832 Spinler J. K.
 Sontakke A.
 Hollister E. B.
 Venable S. F.
 Oh P. L.
 Balderas M. A.
 . ( 2014 ). From prediction to function using evolutionary genomics: human-specific ecotypes of Lactobacillus reuteri have diverse probiotic functions . Genome Biol. Evol.
 6 , 1772 – 1789 . doi: 10.1093/gbe/evu137 24951561 PMC4122935 Teng Q.
 Lv H.
 Peng L.
 Ren Z.
 Chen J.
 Ma L.
 . ( 2024 ). Lactiplantibacillus plantarum ZDY2013 inhibits the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease by regulating the intestinal microbiota and modulating the PI3K/Akt pathway . Nutrients
 16 : 958 . doi: 10.3390/nu16070958 38612992 PMC11013082 The UniProt Consortium ( 2025 ). UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase in 2025 . Nucleic Acids Res.
 53 , D609 – D617 . doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae1010 39552041 PMC11701636 Tilg H.
 Cani P. D.
 Mayer E. A. ( 2016 ). Gut microbiome and liver diseases . Gut
 65 , 2035 – 2044 . doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2016-312729 27802157 Torres S.
 Fabersani E.
 Marquez A.
 Gauffin-Cano P. ( 2019 ). Adipose tissue inflammation and metabolic syndrome. The proactive role of probiotics . Eur. J. Nutr.
 58 , 27 – 43 . doi: 10.1007/s00394-018-1790-2 30043184 Tripathi A.
 Debelius J.
 Brenner D. A.
 Karin M.
 Loomba R.
 Schnabl B.
 . ( 2018 ). The gut–liver axis and the intersection with the microbiome . Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.
 15 , 397 – 411 . doi: 10.1038/s41575-018-0011-z 29748586 PMC6319369 Van de Wiele T.
 Van den Abbeele P.
 Ossieur W.
 Possemiers S.
 Marzorati M. ( 2015 ). “The simulator of the human intestinal microbial ecosystem (SHIME®),” in The Impact of Food Bioactives on Health: In Vitro and Ex Vivo Models , eds. K. Verhoeckx, P. Cotter, I. López-Expósito, C. Kleiveland, T. Lea, A. Mackie, T. Requena, D. Swiatecka, and H. Wichers (Cham: Springer), 305 – 317 . doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-16104-4_27 29787058 Xavier-Santos D.
 Bedani R.
 Lima E. D.
 Saad S. M. I. ( 2020 ). Impact of probiotics and prebiotics targeting metabolic syndrome . J. Funct. Foods
 64 : 103666 . doi: 10.1016/j.jff.2019.103666 Yao D.
 Wu M.
 Dong Y.
 Ma L.
 Wang X.
 Xu L.
 . ( 2022 ). In vitro fermentation of fructooligosaccharide and galactooligosaccharide and their effects on gut microbiota and SCFAs in infants . J. Funct. Foods
 99 : 105329 . doi: 10.1016/j.jff.2022.105329 Younossi Z.
 Anstee Q. M.
 Marietti M.
 Hardy T.
 Henry L.
 Eslam M.
 . ( 2018 ). Global burden of NAFLD and NASH: trends, predictions, risk factors and prevention . Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.
 15 , 11 – 20 . doi: 10.1038/nrgastro.2017.109 28930295
