1. Front Microbiol. 2025 Aug 11;16:1649750. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2025.1649750. 
eCollection 2025.

A stable 15-member bacterial SynCom promotes Brachypodium growth under drought 
stress.

Yadav A(#)(1), Chen M(#)(1), Acharya SM(1), Kim G(2), Yang Y(1), Zhao TZ(1), 
Tsang E(1), Chakraborty R(1).

Author information:
(1)Climate and Ecosystem Sciences Division, Earth & Environmental Sciences Area, 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Rhizosphere microbiomes are known to drive soil nutrient cycling 
and influence plant fitness during adverse environmental conditions. 
Field-derived robust Synthetic Communities (SynComs) of microbes mimicking the 
diversity of rhizosphere microbiomes can greatly advance a deeper understanding 
of such processes. However, assembling stable, genetically tractable, 
reproducible, and scalable SynComs remains challenging.
METHODS: Here, we present a systematic approach using a combination of network 
analysis and cultivation-guided methods to construct a 15-member SynCom from the 
rhizobiome of Brachypodium distachyon. This SynCom incorporates diverse strains 
from five bacterial phyla. Genomic analysis of the individual strains was 
performed to reveal encoded plant growth-promoting traits, including genes for 
the synthesis of osmoprotectants (trehalose and betaine) and Na+/K+ 
transporters, and some predicted traits were validated by laboratory phenotypic 
assays.
RESULTS: The SynCom demonstrates strong stability both in vitro and in planta. 
Most strains encoded multiple plant growth-promoting functions, and several of 
these were confirmed experimentally. The presence of osmoprotectant and ion 
transporter genes likely contributed to the observed resilience of Brachypodium 
to drought stress, where plants amended with the SynCom recovered better than 
those without. We further observed preferential colonization of SynCom strains 
around root tips under stress, likely due to active interactions between plant 
root metabolites and bacteria.
DISCUSSION: Our results demonstrate that trait-informed construction of 
synthetic communities can yield stable, functionally diverse consortia that 
enhance plant resilience under drought. Preferential colonization near root tips 
points to active, localized plant-microbe signaling as a component of 
stress-responsive recruitment. This stable SynCom provides a scalable platform 
for probing mechanisms of plant-microbe interaction and for developing 
microbiome-based strategies to improve soil and crop performance in variable 
environments.

Copyright © 2025 Yadav, Chen, Acharya, Kim, Yang, Zhao, Tsang and Chakraborty.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2025.1649750
PMCID: PMC12375656
PMID: 40862137

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.