2. Chemosphere. 2020 Jan;238:124512. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.124512. Epub
 2019 Aug 5.

Coupling of bioaugmentation and biostimulation to improve lindane removal from
different soil types.

Raimondo EE(1), Saez JM(1), Aparicio JD(2), Fuentes MS(1), Benimeli CS(3).

Author information:
(1)Planta Piloto de Procesos Industriales Microbiológicos (PROIMI-CONICET),
Avenida Belgrano y Pasaje Caseros, 4000, Tucumán, Argentina.
(2)Planta Piloto de Procesos Industriales Microbiológicos (PROIMI-CONICET),
Avenida Belgrano y Pasaje Caseros, 4000, Tucumán, Argentina; Facultad de
Bioquímica, Química y Farmacia, Universidad Nacional de Tucumán, Ayacucho 491,
4000, Tucumán, Argentina.
(3)Planta Piloto de Procesos Industriales Microbiológicos (PROIMI-CONICET),
Avenida Belgrano y Pasaje Caseros, 4000, Tucumán, Argentina; Facultad de
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Catamarca, Belgrano 300,
4700, Catamarca, Argentina. Electronic address: cbenimeli@yahoo.com.ar.

Lindane is an organochlorine pesticide that, due to its persistence in the
environment, is still detected in different matrices. Bioremediation using
actinobacteria consortia proved to be promising for the restoration of
contaminated soils. Another alternative to remove xenobiotics is to use
agricultural residues, which stimulates microbial activity, increasing its
capacity to degrade organic pollutants. The present work studies the coupling of
sugarcane bagasse biostimulation and bioaugmentation with the actinobacteria
consortium composed of Streptomyces sp. A2, A5, A11 and M7 on lindane removal in
different soil types. In this sense, factorial designs with three factors
(proportion and size of sugarcane bagasse particles, and moisture content) were
employed. A response optimizer identified the combination of factors levels that
jointly allowed obtaining the maximum lindane removal in the evaluated
conditions. In the optimal conditions, the effect of the bioremediation process
on soil microbiota was studied by evaluating different parameters. The highest
lindane removal percentages were detected in biostimulated microcosms
bioaugmented with the microbial consortium, which were accompanied by a decrease
in lindane half-life respect to the controls. Also, the bioaugmentation of
biostimulated microcosms increased the microbial counts and enhanced soil
enzymatic activities, corroborating the bioremediation process efficiency. The
survival of the four actinobacteria at the end of the assay confirmed the
ability of all Streptomyces strains to colonize amended soils. Bioremediation by
simultaneous application of biostimulation with sugarcane bagasse and
bioaugmentation with the actinobacteria consortium, in the optimized conditions,
represents an efficient strategy to restore lindane contaminated soils.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.124512
PMID: 31430718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
