1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jan 29;11:44. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00044. eCollection
 2020.

Interactions Between Cells of Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans and 
Leptospirillum ferriphilum During Pyrite Bioleaching.

Li Q(1), Zhu J(2), Li S(3), Zhang R(4), Xiao T(1), Sand W(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Water Quality and Conservation of the Pearl River Delta, 
Ministry of Education, School of Environmental Science and Engineering, 
Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Biometallurgy of Ministry of Education, School of Minerals 
Processing and Bioengineering, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(3)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Guangdong University of 
Technology, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR), Hanover, 
Germany.
(5)College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Donghua University, 
Shanghai, China.
(6)Biofilm Centre, Aquatische Biotechnologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Essen, 
Germany.

Sulfobacillus and Leptospirillum occur frequently in leaching systems. Here we 
investigated the effects of cells of L. ferriphilum on biofilm formation and 
leaching performance by S. thermosulfidooxidans. The effects were caused by the 
presence of L. ferriphilum or an addition of pyrite leach liquor from L. 
ferriphilum. Data show that the number of attached S. thermosulfidooxidans on 
pyrite increases, if the pyrite had been pre-colonized by living biofilms of L. 
ferriphilum, while it decreases if the pre-colonized biofilms had been 
inactivated. Coaggregation between S. thermosulfidooxidans and L. ferriphilum 
occurs during the dual-species biofilm formation, but different effects on 
bioleaching were noted, if the preculture of L. ferriphilum had been different. 
If L. ferriphilum had been pre-colonized on a pyrite, significantly negative 
effect was shown. However, if the two species were simultaneously inoculated 
into a sterile leaching system, the bioleaching efficiency was better than that 
of a pure culture of S. thermosulfidooxidans. The effect might be related to a 
metabolic preference of S. thermosulfidooxidans. If S. thermosulfidooxidans 
performed leaching in a filtered pyrite leachate from L. ferriphilum, the cells 
preferred to oxidize RISCs instead of ferrous ion and the number of attached 
cells decreased compared with the control. This study gives an indication that 
in a short-term multi-species leaching system the role of S. thermosufidooxidans 
may be related to the time of its introduction.

Copyright © 2020 Li, Zhu, Li, Zhang, Xiao and Sand.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00044
PMCID: PMC7000362
PMID: 32063894