1. J Environ Manage. 2024 Sep;368:122098. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2024.122098.
Epub  2024 Aug 9.

Mapping the wildland-urban interface at municipal level for wildfire exposure 
analysis in mainland Portugal.

Bruno B(1), Sandra O(2), Mário C(3), Jorge R(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Geographical Studies, Institute of Geography and Spatial Planning, 
University of Lisbon, Portugal; Associate Laboratory TERRA, Portugal. Electronic 
address: bruno.barbosa@edu.ulisboa.pt.
(2)Centre of Geographical Studies, Institute of Geography and Spatial Planning, 
University of Lisbon, Portugal; Associate Laboratory TERRA, Portugal.
(3)NOVA Information Management School (NOVA IMS), Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 
Portugal; Direção-Geral do Território, Portugal.

The Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI), where vegetation and built-up structures 
intermingle, encompasses a variety of territorial elements that interact 
spatially, being variable both in space and time. Mapping the WUI at finer 
scales is paramount to assess wildfire exposure and define tailored mitigation 
strategies. Our aim was to develop a semi-automated method to map the WUI at 
municipal level, leveraging recent advances in data and technology. We tested 
the procedure in four municipalities of mainland Portugal with different fire 
history, biophysical conditions, and sociodemographic contexts. We considered 
WUI as either intermix or interface. Our approach integrates both building 
location data and high-resolution vegetation maps, to calculate the density of 
buildings and forest cover proportion within different circular moving window 
sizes. Within each radius, we evaluated the total area and spatial distribution 
of the WUI types, as well as the number of buildings within WUI and within the 
fire perimeters recorded between the years 2000 and 2022 and analysed the 
differences between municipalities. We then compared the mapped WUI with 
previous WUI mappings for mainland Portugal, to identify common spots and 
potential spatial divergences. We found that the area mapped as WUI within all 
four municipalities ranged from about 400 km2 to 1135 km2 depending on the 
radius size. A distinct distribution for each type of WUI was observed as the 
radius size increased: the intermix WUI showed a tendency to increase, and the 
interface WUI increased only between the radius of 100 and 200 m, decreasing 
gradually in subsequent radii. Between 39.4% and 45.5% of the nearly 200,000 
buildings in the study areas were within WUI, depending on radius size and a 
total of 5436 buildings were within the historic fire perimeter. Although the 
comparison with other maps showed fair agreement, due to differences in data and 
methodology, common areas mapped as WUI were found, which suggests that these 
areas should receive greater attention from decision-makers regarding fire 
management strategies, since their classification as WUI remains consistent 
across different methodologies.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2024.122098
PMID: 39126844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.