1. Food Res Int. 2026 Oct 31;242(Pt 5):120292. doi:
10.1016/j.foodres.2026.120292.  Epub 2026 Aug 4.

Plant-based beverage fermented by a potential probiotic co-culture of Pichia
kluyveri and Lactiplantibacillus plantarum: bioactive composition,
bioaccessibility, and modulation of antibiotic-induced gut dysbiosis.

de Souza HLS(1), de Sousa Melo D(1), de Castro AT(1), Resende IF(1), Buttrós
VH(2), de Miranda NMZ(3), Ramos CL(4), Esteves EA(3), Schwan RF(1), Dias DR(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Federal University of Lavras (UFLA), University
Campus, Lavras, Minas Gerais 37200-900, Brazil.
(2)Soil Department, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto
Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Federal University of the Jequitinhonha and Mucuri
Valleys (UFVJM), Diamantina, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Department of Basic Sciences, Federal University of the Jequitinhonha and
Mucuri Valleys (UFVJM), Diamantina, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(5)Department of Food Science, Federal University of Lavras (UFLA), Lavras,
Minas Gerais 37200-900, Brazil. Electronic address: diasdr@ufla.br.

Plant-based beverages are promising non-dairy matrices for delivering probiotic
microorganisms and fermentation-derived bioactive compounds. The present study
investigated the impact of fermenting a beverage composed of oats, almonds, and
sunflower seeds with the potential probiotic co-culture Lactiplantibacillus
plantarum CCMA 0743 and Pichia kluyveri CCMA 0615. The effects on beverage
composition, bioaccessibility of bioactive compounds, and modulation of
antibiotic-induced gut dysbiosis in BALB/c mice were assessed. After 24 h of
fermentation, the fermented beverage exhibited high microbial viability, with L.
plantarum and P. kluyveri reaching 9.32 and 7.05 log CFU/mL, respectively. The
process facilitated carbohydrate utilization, acidification, and the generation
of bioactive metabolites. Nutritional and functional profiles were enhanced, as
evidenced by increased concentrations of linoleic acid, short-chain fatty acids,
caffeic, gallic, and vanillic acids, vitamins B2 and B12, and γ-aminobutyric
acid (GABA). Simulated gastrointestinal digestion demonstrated improved
bioaccessibility of essential amino acids and B-complex vitamins. In vivo, a
vancomycin-induced gut dysbiosis model was established, characterized by
depletion of Bacillota and Bacteroidota and by the expansion of Pseudomonadota
and Enterobacteriaceae-related taxa. Administration of the fermented beverage
promoted microbial recovery, increasing the abundance of taxa associated with
intestinal homeostasis and short-chain fatty acid production, particularly the
Lachnospiraceae and Oscillospiraceae families. Collectively, these findings
indicate that fermentation with a potential probiotic co-culture enhances the
nutritional and functional quality of plant-based beverages and facilitates the
restoration of gut microbial balance following antibiotic-induced dysbiosis,
underscoring its potential as a functional non-dairy probiotic food.

Copyright © 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2026.120292
PMID: 42637394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.