1. ISME J. 2017 Aug;11(8):1813-1824. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2017.49. Epub 2017 Apr
25.

The Trichodesmium consortium: conserved heterotrophic co-occurrence and genomic 
signatures of potential interactions.

Lee MD(1), Walworth NG(1), McParland EL(1), Fu FX(1), Mincer TJ(2), Levine 
NM(1), Hutchins DA(1), Webb EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Marine Environmental Biology Section, Department of Biological Sciences, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, Department of Marine Chemistry and 
Geochemistry, Woods Hole, MA, USA.

The nitrogen (N)-fixing cyanobacterium Trichodesmium is globally distributed in 
warm, oligotrophic oceans, where it contributes a substantial proportion of new 
N and fuels primary production. These photoautotrophs form macroscopic colonies 
that serve as relatively nutrient-rich substrates that are colonized by many 
other organisms. The nature of these associations may modulate ocean N and 
carbon (C) cycling, and can offer insights into marine co-evolutionary 
mechanisms. Here we integrate multiple omics-based and experimental approaches 
to investigate Trichodesmium-associated bacterial consortia in both laboratory 
cultures and natural environmental samples. These efforts have identified the 
conserved presence of a species of Gammaproteobacteria (Alteromonas macleodii), 
and enabled the assembly of a near-complete, representative genome. 
Interorganismal comparative genomics between A. macleodii and Trichodesmium 
reveal potential interactions that may contribute to the maintenance of this 
association involving iron and phosphorus acquisition, vitamin B12 exchange, 
small C compound catabolism, and detoxification of reactive oxygen species. 
These results identify what may be a keystone organism within Trichodesmium 
consortia and support the idea that functional selection has a major role in 
structuring associated microbial communities. These interactions, along with 
likely many others, may facilitate Trichodesmium's unique open-ocean lifestyle, 
and could have broad implications for oligotrophic ecosystems and elemental 
cycling.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2017.49
PMCID: PMC5520037
PMID: 28440800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

===== OPEN-ACCESS FULL TEXT (local file trichodesmium-lee-ismej201749a.pdf) =====

ORIGINAL ARTICLE
The Trichodesmium consortium: conserved
heterotrophic co-occurrence and genomic
signatures of potential interactions
Michael D Lee 1, Nathan G Walworth 1, Erin L McParland 1, Fei-Xue Fu 1, Tracy J Mincer 2,
Naomi M Levine 1, David A Hutchins 1 and Eric A Webb 1
1Marine Environmental Biology Section, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA and 2Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, Department of Marine Chemistry and
Geochemistry, Woods Hole, MA, USA
The nitrogen (N)-fixing cyanobacterium Trichodesmium is globally distributed in warm, oligotrophic
oceans, where it contributes a substantial proportion of new N and fuels primary production. These
photoautotrophs form macroscopic colonies that serve as relatively nutrient-rich substrates that are
colonized by many other organisms. The nature of these associations may modulate ocean N and
carbon (C) cycling, and can offer insights into marine co-evolutionary mechanisms. Here we integrate
multiple omics-based and experimental approaches to investigate Trichodesmium-associated
bacterial consortia in both laboratory cultures and natural environmental samples. These efforts
have identified the conserved presence of a species of Gammaproteobacteria ( Alteromonas
macleodii), and enabled the assembly of a near-complete, representative genome. Interorganismal
comparative genomics between A. macleodii and Trichodesmium reveal potential interactions that
may contribute to the maintenance of this association involving iron and phosphorus acquisition,
vitamin B 12 exchange, small C compound catabolism, and detoxification of reactive oxygen species.
These results identify what may be a keystone organism within Trichodesmium consortia and
support the idea that functional selection has a major role in structuring associated microbial
communities. These interactions, along with likely many others, may facilitate Trichodesmium’s
unique open-ocean lifestyle, and could have broad implications for oligotrophic ecosystems and
elemental cycling.
The ISME Journal (2017) 11, 1813–1824; doi:10.1038/ismej.2017.49; published online 25 April 2017
Introduction
Most primary producers are associated with a
heterotrophic community, often through physical
attachment and direct colonization (Nausch, 1996;
Fisher et al. , 1998; Sapp et al. , 2007; Hmelo et al. ,
2012). A common feature of these associations is the
passive transfer from host to epibiont of organic
carbon (C), and in the case of diazotrophs such as
Trichodesmium, reduced nitrogen (N) (Mulholland
et al. , 2006). These assemblages provide a dynamic
interorganismal interface wherein, despite some
likely competitive interactions (Amin et al. , 2012),
many relationships have been found to be mutualis-
tic. For example, epibionts can assist their host
through the acquisition of trace metals or other
nutrients, reduction of local concentrations of
hazardous compounds, and secretion of anti-
biofouling agents (Paerl and Pinckney, 1996; Morris
et al. , 2008; Bertrand and Allen, 2012; Beliaev et al. ,
2014; Bertrand et al., 2015). Elucidating the nature of
these interactions and their consequent modulation
of host/colony elemental fluxes is integral to devel-
oping a complete understanding of marine biogeo-
chemical cycling.
At a broad taxonomic level, Alphaproteobacteria,
Gammaproteobacteria and Bacteroidetes have been
consistently found in association with many photo-
autotrophs (Fisher et al. , 1998; Sapp et al. , 2007;
Amin et al. , 2012; Bertrand et al. , 2015), including
Trichodesmium (Hewson et al. , 2009; Hmelo et al. ,
2012; Rouco et al. , 2016), likely because of general
lifestyle characteristics such as attachment and
opportunism (Hmelo et al. , 2012). There has also
been evidence supporting host-specific associations
at finer taxonomic resolutions within these clades
(Stevenson and Waterbury, 2006; Lachnit et al. ,
2009; Guannel et al. , 2011; Sison-mangus et al. ,
2014). For instance, heterotrophs co-occurring with
the diatom Pseudo-nitzschia have been shown to
vary as a function of host species and toxicity
Correspondence: EA Webb, Marine Environmental Biology Sec-
tion, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern
California, 3616 Trousdale Parkway, AHF 331a, Los Angeles, CA
90089, USA.
E-mail: eawebb@usc.edu
Received 4 November 2016; revised 31 December 2016; accepted
16 February 2017; published online 25 April 2017
The ISME Journal (2017) 11, 1813–1824
© 2017 International Society for Microbial Ecology All rights reserved 1751-7362/17
www.nature.com/ismej
(Guannel et al. , 2011) — with some epibionts being
mutualistic with regard to their native host, yet
parasitic to others (Sison-mangus et al. , 2014). Such
organismal-specific mutualistic relationships are
believed to have developed through co-evolutionary
histories (Stevenson and Waterbury, 2006; Amin
et al. , 2012; Sison-mangus et al. , 2014). The recently
proposed Black Queen Hypothesis (BQH) (Morris
et al., 2012) offers a mechanistic framework that could
drive such interweavings of evolutionary paths. The
BQH is built upon two main suppositions: (1) certain
bacterial functions are ‘leaky’, meaning they can affect
or be used by nearby organisms, and are therefore
considered ‘public goods’(for example, the exudation
of fixed C by photoautotrophs); and (2) organisms
making use of these public goods may then experi-
ence a positive selective pressure resulting in the loss
of their own costly pathways responsible for those
particular goods (Morris et al. , 2012; Sachs and
Hollowell, 2012). This process is anticipated to leave
in its wake various interorganismal dependencies that
can guide community structure and ultimately lead to
highly specific associations (Sachs and Hollowell,
2012; Morris, 2015).
Trichodesmium spp. are notoriously difficult to
maintain in culture (Paerl et al. , 1989; Waterbury,
2006). It has been suggested that this is perhaps in
part because of the existence of obligate dependen-
cies between host and epibiont (Paerl et al. , 1989;
Zehr, 1995; Waterbury, 2006; Hmelo et al. , 2012).
However, the extent to which the interactions
between Trichodesmium and their consortia mod-
ulate Trichodesmium physiology and N 2 fixation
remains largely unstudied, despite having long been
recognized as significant (Borstad, 1978; O ’Neil and
Roman, 1992).
Here we investigate microbial communities asso-
ciated with Trichodesmium spp. in laboratory
enrichments and natural environmental samples,
and present a highly conserved association found
to be present in both laboratory samples and in situ .
We then use an interorganismal comparative geno-
mics approach to generate genetic-based hypotheses
as to what interactions may be contributing to the
maintenance of these organisms ’co-occurrence.
Materials and methods
Nucleic acid extractions
DNA extractions were performed for this study for
tag analysis only. All other data sets were attained
from prior studies (detailed in Supplementary Table
S1). Extractions utilized the FastDNA Spin Kit for
Soil (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA, USA) follow-
ing the manufacturer ’s protocol. For enrichments
currently maintained, ~ 75 ml were filtered onto
5 μm polycarbonate Nucleopore filters (Whatman,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA). Filters were placed directly
into lysis tubes of extraction kit. Protocol blanks
(nothing added to lysis tubes) were performed to
track potential kit-introduced contamination.
Tag data sequencing and analysis
DNA from the 11 samples extracted for this study
(plus two blanks) was sent for sequencing by a
commercial vender (Molecular Research LP, MR
DNA, Shallowater, TX, USA). Illumina (San Diego,
CA, USA) MiSeq paired-end (2 × 300 bp) sequencing
was performed with primers targeting the V4V5
region of the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene (515f:
5′-GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3′; 926r: 5 ′-CCG
YCAATTYMTTTRAGTTT-3′; Parada et al. , 2015).
Library preparation and sequencing was carried out
at the facility following Illumina library preparation
protocols.
Tag data curation and initial merging of paired reads
were performed withinmothur v.1.36.1 (Schlosset al.,
2009) following the mothur Illumina MiSeq Standard
Operating Procedure (Kozich et al. , 2013). These
merged and quality-filtered sequences were demulti-
plexed, primers trimmed, and contigs clustered using
Minimum Entropy Decomposition (MED) (Eren et al.,
2014). MED is an unsupervis ed, non-alignment-based
algorithm that enables single-nucleotide resolution
when segregating amplicon sequences. This has been
shown to often result in biologically relevant repre-
sentative sequences (referred to herein as ‘oligotypes’)
more similar than traditional techniques of clustering
operational taxonomic units can achieve — even at
99% ID similarity (Eren et al. , 2013; Mclellan et al. ,
2013). Six ‘non-Trichodesmium’, particle-size fraction
samples previously sequenced with the same primers
(Parada et al., 2015) were added to our data set before
clustering with MED in order to address and negate
the possibility of the ubiquitous presence of any
oligotypes. Extraction blanks (no sample or DNA
added to DNA lysis tubes) were used to identify and
remove potential contaminants resulting from the lab
or extraction kit as described previously (Lee et al. ,
2015).
Other 16S rRNA sequences used in this study
included heterotrophs isolated from Trichodesmium
cultures (see below), a clone library study of
associated epibionts of natural colonies (Hmelo
et al. , 2012), 16S rRNA sequences derived from an
environmental Trichodesmium metagenomic sample
from the Sargasso Sea (Walworth et al. , 2015) and a
recent marker-gene study (Rouco et al., 2016). These
sequences were trimmed to cover only the V4V5
region with mothur v.1.36.1 (Schloss et al. , 2009) by
aligning to the mothur-recreated Silva SEED data-
base v119 and then trimming to targeted region using
database positions 11895:28464. These and the
recovered oligotypes from this study were then
aligned in Geneious v.9.0.5 (Kearse et al. , 2012),
using Muscle (Edgar, 2004) with default settings, and
a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree was con-
structed with the PhyML plug-in v.2.2.0 (default
settings, 100 bootstraps). In silico analysis of the
primers utilized in the Hmelo et al . (2012) clone
library study was done with the web-based
‘PCR Products ’ tool (www.bioinformatics.org/sms2/
pcr_products.html; Stothard, 2000).
The Trichodesmium consortium
MD Lee et al
1814
The ISME Journal
Metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing and
analysis
Various data sets from multiple sources were used in
this study and are described in Supplementary Table
S1, with further information presented in
Supplementary Table S2. Five metagenomic data
sets from a long-term Trichodesmium CO2 manip-
ulation experiment, presented elsewhere (Hutchins
et al. , 2015), were generated through sequencing
performed at USC ’s Epigenome Center (Los Angeles,
CA, USA). DNA from these samples was previously
extracted with the MoBio DNA PowerPlant kit
(MoBio, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and sequenced with
Illumina’s HiSeq (2 × 50 bp) with a 300-bp insert.
Raw data were quality-filtered (minimum quality 20,
minimum length 35) with the FASTX-toolkit (han-
nonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/).
The quality-filtered forward and reverse reads
from the five metagenomic data sets from the long-
term Trichodesmium CO2 experiment (Hutchins
et al. , 2015) were concatenated, interleaved, and
co-assembled with IDBA-UD v.1.1.1 (Peng et al. ,
2012) (Supplementary Table S3 contains co-
assembly statistics). Coverage profiles were gener-
ated for each of the five original metagenomes by
mapping them to the co-assembly with Bowtie2
(Langmead and Salzberg, 2012). Metagenomic bin-
ning (clustering contigs into representative genomes)
was carried out using the analysis and visualization
platform Anvi ’o (Eren et al. , 2015). Anvi ’o utilizes
CONCOCT (Alneberg et al., 2014), based on coverage
and tetranucleotide composition, to perform an
initial unsupervised clustering of contigs, and then
allows for human-guided curation. Available envir-
onmental Trichodesmium metagenomic (Walworth
et al. , 2015) and metatranscriptomic (Hewson et al. ,
2009) data sets were subsequently mapped to these
bins to investigate their environmental significance.
Refinement of Alteromonas macleodii bin
To improve our representative genome ofA. macleodii,
we mapped all five of the metagenomes used in the co-
assembly to our A. macleodii bin recovered from
Anvi’o. Only reads that successfully mapped were
then subsequently assembled with the SPAdes genome
assembler v.3.8.1 (Bankevich et al., 2012). Comparing
these two bins with QUAST (v.4.1) (Gurevich et al. ,
2013) revealed this process yielded a higher-quality
assembly (Supplementary Table S4), and this refined
A. macleodii b i nw a su t i l i z e di ns u b s e q u e n ta n a l y s e s .
Identification of genes/gene clusters within
A. macleodii bin
The genetic potential for siderophore and acyl-
homoserine lactone production was identified by
way of the web-based tool AntiSmash (Weber et al. ,
2015); this uses well-curated Hidden Markov Models
to identify gene clusters involved in secondary
metabolite biosynthesis and transport. All other
genes were identified through BLAST (Altschul
et al. , 1990) or Hidden Markov Model searches
(HMMER v.3.1b2) of profiles built from reference
sequences as presented in Supplementary Table S5.
Isolation of heterotrophs from Trichodesmium
Epibionts were isolated from Trichodesmium cul-
tures using a soft agar RMP medium with the
following modifications: 5 g of agarose added to
250 ml MilliQ water before autoclaving, and a sterile
addition of 0.3% methanol, final concentration, was
added post-autoclaving and cooled to 50 °C before
plates were poured. Trichodesmium cultivars of
A. macleodii , A020, A021 and A029, were isolated
from T. erythraeum K-11#131 by inoculating colo-
nies onto the solid RMP-methanol medium using a
sterile loop and incubating at 27 °C under a 14:10
light:dark regime (100 μM m − 2 s − 1). Trichodesmium
filaments were motile in the soft agar medium
leaving trails of epibionts after 7 –10 days. Sections
of enriched trails were excised using a sterile scalpel
and inoculated onto fresh RMP-methanol agar.
Individual colonies were isolated and grown in
liquid RMP-methanol medium containing 0.1%
tryptone and cryopreserved in 10% dimethylsulf-
oxide at − 80 °C.
Siderophore production assay
Chrome azurol S plates were used to screen for
siderophore production as described previously
(Schwyn and Neilands, 1987).
DMSP analysis
The production of dimethylsulfoniopropionate
(DMSP) by T. erythraeum IMS101 was measured in
replete, phosphorus (P)-limited, and iron (Fe)-lim-
ited conditions. Enrichments were grown in 1 l of
YBC-II media (Chen et al., 1996) in 2 l polycarbonate
baffled flasks at 26 °C under a 14:10 light:dark cycle
(150 μM m − 2 s − 1) with fluorescent light. Enrichments
were continuously shaken to avoid cell sedimenta-
tion. Before analysis of DMSP production, nutrient-
limited cultures were semi-continuously acclimated
to nutrient conditions (P-limited was 25 × lower than
replete and Fe-limited had no Fe added). Limitation
was confirmed via growth rates. DMSP was sampled
in all cultures on day 10.
DMSP was measured as dimethylsulfide (DMS) on a
custom Shimadzu GC-2014 equipped with a flame
photometric detector and a Chromosil 330 packed
column. Briefly, DMSP was cleaved to DMS via
alkaline hydrolysis using 5 M NaOH and pre-
concentrated using a liquid-N purge-and-trap method
following a modified protocol (Kiene and Service,
1991). Samples for chlorophyll-a were filtered on
GF/F filters, extracted in 90% acetone and measured
on a Turner Trilogy (San Jose, CA, USA) fluorometer.
See supplemental text for further discussion.
Accession information
Accession numbers for previously deposited data
sets are presented in Supplementary Table S1. The
The Trichodesmium consortium
MD Lee et al
1815
The ISME Journal
tag data generated herein have been uploaded to
NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive under accession
number SRP078329. The five metagenomes from
the Trichodesmium long-term CO 2 manipulation
experiment (Hutchins et al. , 2015) have been
deposited in NCBI ’s Sequence Read Archive under
SRP078343. The draft genome of A. macleodii has
been deposited in NCBI ’s Whole Genome Shotgun
database under accession MBSN00000000. Clone
library sequences of isolates from Trichodesmium
are available through NCBI ’s GenBank, accession
numbers KX519544 –KX519550.
Results and Discussion
The microbial composition of Trichodesmium
consortia
Trichodesmium-associated communities were initi-
ally investigated via 16S rRNA gene sequencing
performed on 11 samples spanning two species and
multiple strains. These included several distinct
laboratory-maintained cultures and an environmen-
tal sample of handpicked and washed individual
Trichodesmium colonies (Webb et al. , 2007)
(Supplementary Table S1). Consistent with prior
studies (Hewson et al. , 2009; Hmelo et al. , 2012),
at a broad taxonomic level this revealed a
predominance of sequences sourced from Bacteroi-
detes, Gammaproteobacteria, and Alphaproteobac-
teria (Supplementary Data Set S1; Supplementary
Table S6). By clustering sequences with single-
nucleotide resolution (Eren et al. , 2014) into groups,
herein referred to as ‘oligotypes’, we identified
several identical sequences (100% similarity over
the ~ 370-bp region sequenced; highlighted in
Supplementary Table S6) as present in all Tricho-
desmium samples ( n = 11), yet absent from ‘non-
Trichodesmium’ samples ( n = 6; consisting of
particle-size fraction environmental data sets pre-
viously generated utilizing the same primers; Parada
et al. , 2015). Subsequently aligning these conserved
oligotypes (those present in all of our samples) to
sequences previously recovered from various other
environmental Trichodesmium samples revealed
highly similar sequences detected in all sources,
and clusters of identical ones within the Gammapro-
teobacteria (Figure 1). These identical sequences,
originating from A. macleodii , were acquired from
samples collected independently by different
researchers at different times and locations, includ-
ing an environmental metagenome, and were gener-
ated by way of three different sequencing
technologies (Figure 1 legend). In light of these
results, and genome-level evidence of co-occurrence
in natural environmental samples presented in the
following section, herein we focus on the
A. macleodii association with Trichodesmium.
Figure 1 Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of 16S rRNA genes depicting only closely related sequences recovered from
Trichodesmium-associated communities of various samples. Colored leaf labels represent the sequence source: blue = tag sequences from
this study, included are only those identical sequences that were found to be present in all 11 Trichodesmium samples analyzed*;
orange = Sanger sequences from organisms isolated directly from individual Trichodesmium colonies; green = Sanger sequences from a
Trichodesmium-associated community clone library study (Hmelo et al. , 2012; while this study did not detect A. macleodii , in silico
analysis of the primers utilized revealed they would not have amplified these sequences); and red = 16S rRNA sequences mined from a
metagenomic assembly of an environmental Trichodesmium sample (Walworth et al., 2015). *‘Oligotype 1923’was present in 10/11 of the
samples analyzed.
The Trichodesmium consortium
MD Lee et al
1816
The ISME Journal
In this vein, we leveraged a recently published study
investigating environmental Trichodesmium epi-
bionts in both the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean using
tag sequencing from handpicked and washed colo-
nies (Rouco et al. , 2016). Processing that data set
with single-nucleotide resolution clustering (Eren
et al. , 2014) reveals our A. macleodii oligotypes are
present in 25 of the 27 samples surveyed (100%
identical across the shared ~ 280 bp between the data
sets) comprising o1–5% of reads recovered, includ-
ing Trichodesmium; these data further demonstrate
the broadly conserved presence of these A. macleo-
dii sequences in situ . The two samples lacking
A. macleodii were out of 10 from the same sampling
site, in the North Pacific, whereas all other 8
contained them. It is therefore possible they were
simply below detection and/or underrepresented
during the initial PCR. Furthermore, Alteromonas
has recently been observed to disproportionally
contribute to global transcripts, with gene expression
being ~ 10-fold higher than genetic abundance
(Dupont et al. , 2015) — that is, low relative abun-
dance does not necessarily suggest low activity.
It is worth noting that all of the 16 ‘finished’
genomes of Alteromonas available through inte-
grated microbial genomes (IMG) (Markowitz et al. ,
2009) possess five 16S rRNA gene copies, which are
often not identical (although typically 499% simi-
lar). It is thus possible that the distinct sequences
presented in Figure 1 within the A. macleodii clade
(which vary only 1 –2 bases over the ~ 370- bp
sequenced) may actually be sourced from a single
genome. Regardless, this marker-gene analysis
revealed the consistent presence of identical
sequences within associated consortia of many
distinct laboratory-maintained and environmental
Trichodesmium samples, suggesting a conserved
association with A. macleodii .
Beyond a marker-gene: genome-level evidence of the co-
occurrence of Trichodesmium and A. macleodii in situ
The striking ubiquity of these identical sequences
across both environmental and laboratory-
maintained samples suggested that Trichodesmium
epibionts occurring in culture may be environmen-
tally relevant, as opposed to being comprised solely
of laboratory-derived contaminants. To investigate
this beyond a single marker-gene, we leveraged
available enrichment-derived metagenomic and
metatranscriptomic (Walworth et al. , 2015) data sets
from the aforementioned long-term CO 2 experiment
(Hutchins et al. , 2015; Supplementary Table S2).
A co-assembly of five metagenomic data sets was
performed in an effort to better access those organ-
isms in low abundance (as Trichodesmium contrib-
uted ~ 96 –99% of total reads), and the resulting
contigs were clustered to identify representative
genomes (Supplementary Data Set S2 for
co-assembly fasta; Supplementary Table S3 for
summary). Beyond Trichodesmium, this process
enabled the recovery of three near-complete repre-
sentative genomes ( ‘bins’) sourced from members of
A. macleodii , Lewinella sp., and Synechococcus sp.
— all estimated at 497% complete and o5%
contamination (Supplementary Table S4).
To assess if these bins were truly representative of
organisms present within in situ Trichodesmium
assemblages, we examined two publically available
Trichodesmium-focused environmental data sets
including the above-mentioned Sargasso Sea meta-
genome (Walworth et al. , 2015) and a southwest
Pacific Ocean metatranscriptome (Hewson et al. ,
2009). Mapping these data sets to our bins revealed
extensive recruitment across our A. macleodii
genome (Figure 2). As mapping is a highly stringent
alignment process, this demonstrated the presence of
a closely related A. macleodii , at the genomic level,
present in both of these Trichodesmium environ-
mental samples, yet absent from particle-size frac-
tion ‘non-Trichodesmium’ samples (Figure 2;
Supplementary Figure S1 for further discussion).
This is particularly remarkable for the Sargasso Sea
metagenomic sample as individual Trichodesmium
colonies were handpicked and washed several times
to remove any organisms not tightly associated — yet
this closely related A. macleodii remained.
It is worth emphasizing that these metagenomic
bins were derived from a laboratory-maintained
Figure 2 Visualization of laboratory enrichment and environ-
mental metagenomic (DNA) and metatranscriptomic (RNA) reads
mapped to our assembled representative genomic bins revealing
the presence of a closely related A. macleodii in both environ-
mental Trichodesmium samples (labeled ‘Tricho’), but absent from
samples lacking Trichodesmium (‘non-Tricho’). A hierarchical
clustering of contigs from the co-assembly is shown at the top
segregating contigs into representative genomic bins as depicted
by the four large colored columns and labeled at the bottom. Thin,
vertical peaks display log transformed normalized coverage of
reads (across that sample/row) mapped to that contig (column/
leaf). ‘High’and ‘low’CO2 DNA and RNA samples mapping from
the long-term experiment to these newly recovered bins revealed
their presence and activity were maintained in both CO 2
treatments, even after several hundred generations (Hutchins
et al. , 2015). SCB, Southern California Bight. See Supplementary
Table S1 for detailed sample information.
The Trichodesmium consortium
MD Lee et al
1817
The ISME Journal
Trichodesmium erythraeum enrichment, strain
IMS101, which was originally isolated ~ 25 years
ago (Prufert-Bebout et al. , 1993). Regardless of
whether this cohabitation with A. macleodii has
persisted over the entire time IMS101 has been in
culture, or if the organism was introduced as a
‘contaminant’ at some point in the strain ’s long
cultivation history (~3500 generations) and subse-
quently maintained, its co-occurrence in these
laboratory enrichments and in the environment in
28/30 available samples (evidenced by marker-gene
analysis and at the genome level) intimates a robust
stability of this association. It is also important to
note that while this relationship may not be
exclusive, as A. macleodii is commonly observed
in association with other photoautotrophs (Morris
et al., 2008; Biller et al., 2015), collectively these data
suggest Trichodesmium colonies may consistently
harbor A. macleodii — a finding with significant
implications regarding our understanding of Tricho-
desmium’s physiology. As phytoplankton-associated
communities are understood to be structured by
functional and characteristic properties of host and
epibiont (Stevenson and Waterbury, 2006; Guannel
et al., 2011; Lachnit et al., 2011; Sison-mangus et al.,
2014), this conserved association of Trichodesmium
with A. macleodii may in part be maintained by
interorganismal interactions.
Genomic signatures of potential interactions
If this co-occurrence of Trichodesmium and
A. macleodii is being maintained because of specific
interactions, then, as predicted by the BQH, there
should exist corresponding genetic signatures under-
lying them. In considering the implications of the
BQH, Sachs and Hollowell (2012) recently noted:
‘This new paradigm suggests that bacteria may often
form interdependent cooperative interactions in
communities and moreover that bacterial coopera-
tion should leave a clear genomic signature via
complementary loss of shared diffusible functions ’.
Owing to its tight association with its epibiotic
community, Trichodesmium is a prime candidate for
evolutionary mechanisms such as those described by
the BQH. Moreover, Trichodesmium has long been
considered enigmatic because of its ability to carry
out N 2 fixation (with the O 2-sensitive enzyme
nitrogenase) while contemporaneously performing
O2-evolving photosynthesis with no immediately
apparent mechanism for keeping these two processes
segregated (Carpenter and Price, 1976; Paerl et al. ,
1989; Zehr, 1995). It has been suggested that this may
in part be because of interactions with its associated
community. For example, host exudation of organic
C supports associated heterotrophic growth and fuels
respiration, which in turn can generate microenvir-
onments of low O 2 concentrations thereby reducing
oxic inhibition of host N 2 fixation (Paerl and Kellar,
1978; Paerl and Bebout, 1988; Paerl et al., 1989; Fay,
1992; Zehr, 1995; Paerl and Pinckney, 1996). This
cascade of events benefits the consortium as a whole,
and the development of such complex interorganis-
mal networks has been argued to be a natural
consequence of the BQH — while the underlying
mechanism is certainly not driven by any such
mutualisms, they will tend to emergently arise
(Sachs and Hollowell, 2012; Morris, 2015).
As a first step toward assessing if any such
mutualistic interactions may exist betweenTrichodes-
mium and A. macleodii, we applied an interorganis-
mal comparative genomics approach in order to
identify any potential interactions through their
corresponding genomic footprints. By identifying
these gene loss/retention patterns of shared diffusible
functions, we provide here genetic-based evidence for
potential interactions related to acquisition of Fe and
P, vitamin B 12 exchange, small C compound cycling,
and reactive oxygen species (ROS) detoxification.
Such genetic complementation in and of itself cannot
provide firm evidence of mutualistic interdependen-
cies, but does serve to generate hypotheses about
possible host/epibiont interactive feedbacks and iden-
tifies promising avenues for future definitive studies of
putative BQH relationships.
Fe acquisition
Fe is an essential micronutrient required for photo-
synthesis, respiration, and N 2 fixation that is often
limiting in marine environments (Vraspir and Butler,
2009; Chappellet al., 2012). One mechanism by which
marine microbes overcome Fe limitation is through the
production of extracellular, high-affinity Fe-binding
molecules known as siderophores that scavenge Fe 3+
from the surrounding environment (Aminet al., 2009).
Although many siderophore/Fe complexes are highly
stable and organismal specific (requiring selective
outer membrane receptors and transporters for uptake),
there is a subset produced in the marine environment
that exhibit low organismal specificity and are highly
photoreactive when bound to Fe 3+ (Amin et al., 2009;
Vraspir and Butler, 2009). These complexes become
oxidized through ultraviol et photocatalysis whereby
chelated Fe3+ is reduced and released as Fe 2+,p r o v i d -
ing a substantial source of bioavailable Fe in the photic
zone (Barbeau et al., 2001). The seemingly surprising
observation that many org anisms produce sidero-
phores that so readily serve as ‘public goods’ has led
to the suggestion that they m ay have been evolutiona-
rily selected for as a result of bacterial –phytoplankton
associations (Amin et al. , 2009). Indeed, it has been
shown that this process increases the Fe uptake of
phytoplankton (Barbeau et al. , 2001), and Synecho-
coccus Fe limitation response transcripts have been
shown to significantly decrease when co-cultured with
a siderophore-producing strain ofShewanella (Beliaev
et al., 2014).
Unlike several other cyanobacteria, Trichodes-
mium has not been shown to produce siderophores,
and lacks any known genetic potential to do so
(Chappell and Webb, 2010; Kranzler et al. , 2011).
The Trichodesmium consortium
MD Lee et al
1818
The ISME Journal
However, in addition to mechanisms of ferric and
ferrous inorganic Fe acquisition (Roe and Barbeau,
2014), Trichodesmium does appear to have the
ability to take up Fe-siderophore complexes via
several Ton-B components, tonB-exbB-exbD
(Tery_1418, 4448 and 4449; Chappell and Webb,
2010; Kranzler et al. , 2011). Consistent with BQH
predictions of compensatory gene loss/retention
within mutualistic relationships, our A. macleodii
genomic bin possesses a gene cluster predicted to be
responsible for the biosynthesis of aerobactin
(Supplementary Table S5), a well-studied, low-
affinity, highly photoreactive siderophore (Kupper
et al. , 2006). Transcripts for these genes were
detected in the aforementioned long-term metatran-
scriptomes (Supplementary Table S5), and to further
validate this genetic potential, we experimentally
confirmed the production of siderophores by our
A. macleodii isolates (A020, A021, A029 in Figure 1)
via the chrome azurol S plate assay (Supplementary
Figure S2). Furthermore, the exbB-exbD transporter
components of the potential Trichodesmium uptake
complex share homology with those found in the
freshwater cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp.
PCC6803 (slr0677 and slr0678, at 67% similarity
85% positives and 54/71%, respectively; see
Supplementary Figure S3 for alignments). In Syne-
chocystis PCC6803, these genes have been shown to
be essential for the reduction of Fe 3+ bound to
aerobactin just before the subsequent uptake of Fe 2+
into the cell (Kranzler et al. , 2011).
Although this evidence suggests that Trichodes-
mium may have the ability to obtain Fe bound to the
aerobactin produced by A. macleodii , this hypoth-
esis requires experimental investigation. Regardless,
however, the photoreactivity of these siderophores
and their low stability when ligated to Fe 3+ clearly
result in more available Fe as a public good for any
nearby organisms (Amin et al. , 2009).
Vitamin B 12 exchange
B12 exchange has become a key example of inter-
domain dependence within photoautotroph-
heterotroph associations (Croft et al. , 2005). Most of
this research has focused on eukaryotes (which
cannot synthesize B 12 de novo ; Bertrand and Allen,
2012), whereby biosynthesis of B 12 by associated
heterotrophs is followed by uptake by their algal host
(Croft et al. , 2005; Bertrand et al. , 2015). In contrast
to this commonly seen scenario, in our prokaryote/
prokaryote association Trichodesmium can produce
B12 de novo (Sañudo-Wilhelmy et al., 2014), whereas
A. macleodii cannot. Despite lacking this capability,
there is evidence our A. macleodii may be facultative
with regard to the vitamin as it contains at least two
B12-dependent enzymes: an epoxyqueosine reduc-
tase involved in tRNA modification; and a methio-
nine synthetase, in addition to also containing a B 12-
independent version (Supplementary Table S5). It
has been shown that bacteria capable of both
methods of methionine production are often faculta-
tive, with the B 12-dependent pathway being more
efficient (Augustus and Spicer, 2011). As some
marine cyanobacteria have been shown to exude
B12 (Bonnet et al. , 2010), and our A. macleodii bin
also possesses genes identified as outer membrane
receptors and active transporters of the vitamin (all
found to be expressed, Supplementary Table S5), it
is possible this epibiont may benefit from the
exudation of B 12 by Trichodesmium.
This hypothesized direction of B 12 exchange (from
photoautotrophic host to associated epibionts) is
opposite to that commonly seen within eukaryotic
algal-heterotroph associations (Croft et al. , 2005;
Bertrand et al. , 2015). A general trend is therefore
possible wherein heterotrophs that cannot synthe-
size B 12 may tend to more often associate with
prokaryotic photoautotrophs rather than their eukar-
yotic counterparts. To the best of our knowledge,
such a relationship has yet to be investigated.
P acquisition
As a N fixer, Trichodesmium is believed to com-
monly be P limited, and has been shown to partially
fulfill its P quota through the expression of alkaline
phosphatases (Webb et al. , 2007) — enzymes that
cleave phosphate groups from organic P. In addition,
it has been suggested that there may be selective
pressure within Trichodesmium colonies for organ-
isms possessing greater capabilities of P uptake
(Hewson et al. , 2009). The expression of alkaline
phosphatases by members of Trichodesmium con-
sortia has been previously observed, and these
organisms are expected to ultimately be aiding their
host with P acquisition (Hynes et al. , 2009). Our
A. macleodii does indeed possess the genetic
potential to produce alkaline phosphatases, but
moreover, it also possesses a secondary metabolite
biosynthesis cluster predicted to produce acyl-
homoserine lactones (AHLs; Supplementary Table
S5). AHLs are a class of molecules known to be
involved in quorum sensing (Case et al. , 2008), and
have specifically been shown to double the activity
of alkaline phosphatases upon addition to natural
Trichodesmium colonies (Van Mooy et al. , 2012).
This genetic evidence suggests A. macleodii may be
one of the organisms within Trichodesmium con-
sortia helping to orchestrate the colonial acquisition
of P, a major limiting nutrient to the host in situ .A s
AHLs can modulate many population-level cellular
responses (Amin et al. , 2012), it is likely these
molecules are also coordinating much more than
solely APase activity within these consortia.
Consortial C catabolism
For many phytoplankton, photosynthesis is believed
to be C-limited in situ (Hein and Sand-Jensen, 1997).
Consequently, they use C-concentrating mechanisms
that, although energetically costly, are capable of
The Trichodesmium consortium
MD Lee et al
1819
The ISME Journal
generating intracellular CO 2 concentrations up to
1000-fold higher than external levels (Burnap et al. ,
2015). It has been argued that the Trichodesmium
colony as a whole would benefit from a tight nutrient
coupling system wherein host-exuded organics may
be catabolized relatively rapidly by a metabolically
diverse consortium, thereby in part relieving C-lim-
itation in addition to reducing local O 2 concentra-
tions/inhibition of N 2 fixation (Paerl et al. , 1989;
O’Neil and Roman, 1992; Paerl and Pinckney, 1996).
Here we present two examples where A. macleodii
possesses, and was found to be expressing, the
genetic machinery to degrade specific C compounds
produced by Trichodesmium.
Methanol is an important small C compound in
the global ocean primarily because of its role in
atmospheric ozone production (Heikes, 2002).
Recently, a wide phylogenetic array of phytoplank-
ton have been shown to produce methanol in
significant amounts as a by-product (up to μM levels
for Trichodesmium; Mincer and Aicher, 2016).
Correspondingly, there is genetic evidence that
A. macleodii may be involved in methanol catabo-
lism as our representative genome possesses two
distinct genes identified as pyrroloquinoline
quinone-dependent alcohol dehydrogenases
(enzymes that catalyze methanol/ethanol oxidation,
and are often indicative of facultative methylotro-
phy; Chistoserdova, 2011), as well as the pyrrolo-
quinoline quinone biosynthesis pathway (all found
to be actively transcribed, Supplementary Table S5).
In keeping with these genomic observations, the
three closely related A. macleodii isolates presented
in Figure 1 were isolated in media containing
methanol as the sole C source. Given A. macleodii ’s
consistent association with Trichodesmium, and its
ability to catabolize methanol, it is possible this is
one mechanism by which it is aiding its host through
rapid C cycling and O 2 drawdown.
DMSP is an organosulfur compound produced and
exuded by many phytoplankton and is a major
intercellular metabolite (Stefels et al. , 2007;
Durham et al. , 2015) that has been hypothesized to
serve as an inter-trophic level signaling molecule. It
is known to be both a strong chemoattractant
(Seymour, 2010) and to induce the upregulation of
AHLs (Johnson et al. , 2016), although the full scope
of its cellular function is not yet fully understood
(Yoch, 2002). This compound is rapidly cycled by
heterotrophic bacterioplankton, supplying up to
13% of bacterial C and up to 100% of bacterial
sulfur demand (Kiene and Linn, 2000). Heterotrophs
degrade DMSP via two enzymatically mediated
pathways: a cleavage pathway (dddP) that provides
a labile C source and produces DMS, an environ-
mentally relevant trace gas (Simo, 2001), as a by-
product; and a demethylation pathway (dmdA) that
provides both C and reduced sulfur, foregoing DMS
(Curson et al. , 2011). To date, Trichodesmium is the
only open ocean cyanobacteria that has been shown
to produce significant intracellular concentrations of
DMSP (Bucciarelli et al. , 2013); a function that we
confirmed in both the long-term Trichodesmium CO2
manipulation experiment and in T. erythraeum
IMS101 grown under replete and P and Fe limitation
(Supplementary Figure S4). Our A. macleodii bin has
the genetic potential to both demethylate DMSP
(beginning with dmdA; Supplementary Table S5)
and cleave DMSP ( dddP; Supplementary Table S5),
with both found to be actively transcribed. It also has
previously been demonstrated that some strains of
A. macleodii (with 16S sequences 100% identical to
those from the current study) can grow with DMSP
as a sole C source (Raina et al. , 2009). Although
further investigation is needed to follow-up on this
genetic potential between these co-occurring organ-
isms, this is the first indication that DMSP may be
actively cycled between a cyanobacterial host and its
associated community. This suggests that in addition
to associated community members potentially aiding
their host through rapid C cycling within the colony,
the use of DMSP as a signaling molecule for
heterotrophs to alter their metabolic function toward
a ‘cooperative lifestyle ’ (Johnson et al. , 2016) may
also be occurring in our system.
Detoxification of ROS
When first presenting the BQH, Morris et al. postu-
lated a mutualistic relationship between the pico-
cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus and ‘helper’
bacteria. This mutualism was based on the see-
mingly paradoxical lack of a catalase-peroxidase
gene ( katG), or any heme-based catalases or perox-
idases, to aid the O 2-evolving cyanobacterium in
detoxifying ROS (Morris et al. , 2008, 2012). IMS101,
the only finished Trichodesmium genome, is anno-
tated in IMG (Markowitz et al., 2009) as possessing a
catalase peroxidase. However, upon closer inspec-
tion this gene was identified as a pseudogene that
has undergone substantial gene decay (Fawal et al. ,
2013). As annotated by IMG, it remains as only three
gene fragments (Tery_1759, 1760 and 1761) inter-
spersed with start and stop codons, and totals o700-
bp relative to the ~ 2100-bp functional gene. Further-
more, katG genes have been frequently transferred
between organisms (Bernroitner et al. , 2009), and it
appears as though Trichodesmium’s former katG was
horizontally acquired before its pseudogenization
as phylogenetic analysis of the PeroxiBase pseudo-
gene sequence places it deep within the Bacteroi-
detes clade, distinct from other Cyanobacteria
(Supplementary Figure S5). In accordance with this
apparent history, a recent survey found that hor-
izontally transferred genes were twice as likely as
those vertically transmitted to become pseudogen-
ized (Liu et al. , 2004).
Consistent with the BQH ‘helper’ role, our
A. macleodii possesses a katG found to be transcrip-
tionally active (Supplementary Table S5), and the
species is known to produce catalase peroxidase
(Morris et al. , 2011). In fact, a strain of A. macleodii
The Trichodesmium consortium
MD Lee et al
1820
The ISME Journal
was the first ‘helper’bacteria described to assist the
growth of Prochlorococcus (Morris et al. , 2008) as a
result of this activity. This suggests that A. macleodii
may be aiding in the detoxification of ROS within
Trichodesmium consortia in a similar manner. ROS
toxicity is particularly problematic for photoauto-
trophs exposed to intense irradiance, and as Tricho-
desmium frequently forms large surface blooms, ROS
detoxification could thus be an important service
provided by A. macleodii for its cyanobacterial host.
The Alteromonas genus: functional distribution and
association with photoautotrophs
There are currently 16 Alteromonas ‘finished’ gen-
omes available through IMG (Markowitz et al., 2009)
(accessed July 2016), many with differences regard-
ing the aforementioned functions identified in our
Trichodesmium-derived A. macleodii bin. For
instance, only 2 of the 16 also contain a gene cluster
for siderophore production, only 3 possess an mdh2
gene (implicated in methylotrophy; Keltjens et al. ,
2014), and 7 are predicted to produce AHLs
(Supplementary Table S7). In contrast, similarities
can be seen across the genus in the possession of
genes related to DMSP degradation, APase activity,
and the apparent facultative usage of vitamin B 12
(Supplementary Table S7).
Recently, the genome of an A. macleodii isolated
from a Prochlorococcus culture has been constructed
(Biller et al. , 2015). In searching this genome for the
above-discussed genetic capabilities, this strain con-
tains all of those found within our bin, except,
interestingly, the potential to produce AHLs
(Supplementary Table S7). This may reflect that the
density of organisms associated with the unicellular
Prochlorococcus is much lower than in the relatively
enriched Trichodesmium colony environment,
which may render quorum sensing ineffective.
Whether there are properties of some A. macleodii
that make them more prone to being associated with
photoautotrophs, as opposed to particles, warrants
deeper investigation.
Conclusion
Here we have presented molecular evidence that
Trichodesmium may be consistently associated with
A. macleodii in both laboratory-maintained enrich-
ments and in situ (at the marker-gene and genome
level). These data do not, however, allow us to
address the exclusivity or promiscuity with regard to
A. macleodii . Ultimately any organismal associa-
tions are going to be functionally and characteristi-
cally driven, rather than taxonomically or even
phylogenomically. As such, it is possible similar
heterotrophic strains may be commonly found co-
occurring with various photoautotrophs (as they
tend to exhibit comparable qualities), whereas
Trichodesmium spp. may only exist in association
with A. macleodii ; importantly, this would not
lessen the potential import of A. macleodii’si m p a c t
on Trichodesmium’s physiology.
The unique lifestyle of Trichodesmium and its
biogeochemical significance make its colonial infra-
structure an ideal and necessary regime to be viewed
in the light of co-evolutionary processes such as
those laid out by the BQH. In addition to showing
Figure 3 Schematic of the discussed potential interactions between Trichodesmium and A. macleodii . Beige box, Trichodesmium;
Purple boxes, A. macleodii cells; AA, amino acids; APases, alkaline phosphatase; DMS, dimethylsulfide; KatG, catalase-peroxidase; red
ellipses, siderophores. (Colony image courtesy of WHOI).
The Trichodesmium consortium
MD Lee et al
1821
The ISME Journal
that Trichodesmium may consistently harbor
A. macleodii , we have further presented genetic
and experimental evidence that generates several
hypotheses regarding potential interactions between
these organisms that may ultimately be contributing
to the maintenance of this association (Figure 3).
Although direct experimental observation of these
putative mutualistic interactions is not a trivial task
(as there are no axenic cultures of Trichodesmium),
this work opens the door to further investigations of
this relationship.
Photoautotroph–heterotroph associations repre-
sent complex systems of interorganismal interactions
and A. macleodii is only one of many organisms
thriving within Trichodesmium colonies. While this
work provides a foundation and path toward targeted
investigations of what may be a keystone organism
within these consortia, many interactions likely exist
between this host and its other epibionts, as well as
solely between the various associated organisms.
Ultimately these intricate networks of organismal
interconnectivity have direct impacts on the phy-
siology of Trichodesmium, and therefore on fluxes of
biologically and climatically relevant elements such
as C, N, P, Fe and S in the open ocean. Unraveling
these networks is integral to our understanding of
not only Trichodesmium’s productivity and evolu-
tion, but also to our emerging picture of ocean
biogeochemistry.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
We thank Gustavo Ramirez for insightful discussion and
assistance in editing the manuscript through various draft
stages. Funding was provided by US National Science
Foundation grants BO-OCE 1260490 to DAH, EAW and
F-XF, a Rose Hills Foundation grant to NML and EM, and
CHE-OCE 1131415 to TJM.
References
Alneberg J, Bjarnason BSS, de Bruijn I, Schirmer M,
Quick J, Ijaz UZ et al. (2014). Binning metagenomic
contigs by coverage and composition. Nat Meth 11:
1144–1146.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ.
(1990). Basic local alignment search tool. J Mol Biol
215: 403 –410.
Amin SA, Green DH, Hart MC, Küpper FC, Sunda WG,
Carrano CJ. (2009). Photolysis of iron-siderophore
chelates promotes bacterial-algal mutualism. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 106: 17071 –17076.
Amin SA, Parker MSM, Armbrust EV. (2012). Interactions
between diatoms and bacteria. Microbio Mol Bio R 76:
667–684.
Augustus AM, Spicer LD. (2011). The MetJ regulon in
Gammaproteobacteria determined by comparative
genomics methods. BMC Gen 12: 558.
Bankevich A, Nurk S, Antipov D, Gurevich AA,
Dvorkin M, Kulikov AS et al. (2012). SPAdes: a new
genome assembly algorithm and its applications to
single-cell sequencing. J Comp Biol 19: 455 –477.
Barbeau K, Rue EL, Bruland KW, Butler A. (2001).
Photochemical cycling of iron in the surface ocean
mediated by microbial iron(III)-binding ligands. Nature
413: 409 –413.
Beliaev AS, Romine MF, Serres M, Bernstein HC,
Linggi BE, Markillie L et al. (2014). Inference of
interactions in cyanobacterial–heterotrophic co-cultures
via transcriptome sequencing.ISME J 8: 2243–2255.
Bernroitner M, Zamocky M, Furtmu PG, Furtmüller PG,
Peschek GA, Obinger C. (2009). Occurrence, phylo-
geny, structure, and function of catalases and perox-
idases in cyanobacteria. J Exp Bot 60: 423 –440.
Bertrand EM, Allen AE. (2012). Influence of vitamin B
auxotrophy on nitrogen metabolism in eukaryotic
phytoplankton. Front Microbio 3:1 –16.
Bertrand EM, McCrow JP, Moustafa A, Zheng H,
McQuaid JB, Delmont TO et al. (2015).
Phytoplankton-bacterial interactions mediate micronu-
trient colimitation at the coastal Antarctic sea ice edge.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112: 9938 –9943.
Biller SJ, Coe A, Chisholm SW, Foun- BM. (2015). Draft
genome sequence of Alteromonas macleodii strain
MIT1002, isolated from an enrichment culture of a
marine cyanobacterium. Genome Announc 3:3 –4.
Bonnet S, Webb Ea, Panzeca C, Karl DM, Capone DG,
Sañudo-Wilhelmy SA. (2010). Vitamin B12 excretion by
cultures of the marine cyanobacteria Crocosphaera and
Synechococcus. Limnol Oceanogr 55: 1959–1964.
Borstad GA. (1978). Some Aspects of the Occurrence and
Biology of Trichodesmium Near Barbados . McGill
University: Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Bucciarelli E, Ridame C, Sunda WG, Dimier-Hugueney C,
Cheize M, Belviso S et al. (2013). Increased intracellular
concentrations of DMSP and DMSO in iron-limited oceanic
phytoplanktonThalassiosira oceanicaand Trichodesmium
erythraeum. Limnol Oceanogr58: 1667–1679.
Burnap R, Hagemann M, Kaplan A. (2015). Regulation of
CO2 concentrating mechanism in Cyanobacteria. Life
5: 348 –371.
Carpenter EJ, Price CC. (1976). Marine oscillatoria ( Tricho-
desmium): explanation for aerobic nitrogen fixation
without heterocysts. Science 191: 1278 –1280.
Case RJ, Labbate M, Kjelleberg S. (2008). AHL-driven
quorum-sensing circuits: their frequency and function
among the Proteobacteria. ISME J 2: 345 –349.
Chappell PD, Moffett JW, Hynes AM, Webb EA. (2012).
Molecular evidence of iron limitation and availability
in the global diazotroph Trichodesmium. ISME J 6:
1728–1739.
Chappell PD, Webb EA. (2010). A molecular assessment of
the iron stress response in the two phylogenetic clades
of Trichodesmium. Environ Microbiol 12:1 3 –27.
Chen YB, Zehr JP, Mellon M. (1996). Growth and nitrogen
fixation of the diazotrophic filamentous nonheterocys-
tous cyanobacterium Trichodesmium sp. IMS 101 in
defined media: evidence for a circadian rhythm.
J Phycol 32: 916 –923.
Chistoserdova L. (2011). Modularity of methylotrophy,
revisited. Environ Microbiol 13: 2603 –2622.
Croft MT, Lawrence AD, Raux-deery E, Warren MJ,
Smith AG. (2005). Algae acquire vitamin B12 through
a symbiotic relationship with bacteria. Nature 438:
90–93.
The Trichodesmium consortium
MD Lee et al
1822
The ISME Journal
Curson ARJ, Todd JD, Sullivan MJ, Johnston AWB. (2011).
Catabolism of dimethylsulphoniopropionate: microor-
ganisms, enzymes and genes. Nat Rev Microbiol 9:
849–859.
Dupont CL, McCrow JP, Valas R, Moustafa A, Walworth N,
Goodenough U et al. (2015). Genomes and gene
expression across light and productivity gradients in
eastern subtropical Pacific microbial communities.
ISME J 9: 1076 –1092.
Durham BP, Sharma S, Luo H, Smith CB, Amin SA,
Bender SJ et al. (2015). Cryptic carbon and sulfur
cycling between surface ocean plankton. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 112: 453 –457.
Edgar RC. (2004). MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment
method with reduced time and space complexity. BMC
Bioinf 5: 113.
Eren AM, Morrison HG, Lescault PJ, Reveillaud J,
Vineis JH, Sogin ML. (2014). Minimum entropy
decomposition: unsupervised oligotyping for sensitive
partitioning of high-throughput marker gene
sequences. ISME J 9: 968 –979.
Eren AM, Esen ÖC, Quince C, Vineis JH, Morrison HG,
Sogin ML et al. (2015). Anvi’o: an advanced analysis and
visualization platform for ‘omics data. PeerJ 3: e1319.
Eren AM, Maignien L, Sul WJ, Murphy LG, Grim SL,
Morrison HG et al. (2013). Oligotyping: differentiating
between closely related microbial taxa using 16S rRNA
gene data. Methods Ecol Evol 4: 1111 –1119.
Fawal N, Li Q, Savelli B, Brette M, Passaia G, Fabre M et al.
(2013). PeroxiBase: a database for large-scale evolu-
tionary analysis of peroxidases. Nucleic Acids Res 41:
441–444.
Fay P. (1992). Oxygen relations of nitrogen fixation in
cyanobacteria. Microbiol Rev 56: 340 –373.
Fisher MM, Wilcox LW, Graham LE. (1998). Molecular
characterization of epiphytic bacterial communities
on charophycean green algae. Microb Ecol 64:
4384–4389.
Guannel ML, Horner-Devine MC, Rocap G. (2011). Bacter-
ial community composition differs with species and
toxigenicity of the diatom Pseudo-nitzschia. Aquat
Microb Ecol 64: 117 –133.
Gurevich A, Saveliev V, Vyahhi N, Tesler G. (2013). QUAST:
quality assessment tool for genome assemblies. BMC
Bioinform (Oxford, England) 29: 1072–1075.
Heikes BG. (2002). Atmospheric methanol budget and ocean
implication. Global Biogeochem Cycles 16:1 –13.
Hein M, Sand-Jensen K. (1997). CO 2 increases oceanic
primary production. Nature 388: 526 –527.
Hewson I, Poretsky RS, Dyhrman ST, Zielinski B,
White AE, Tripp HJ et al. (2009). Microbial community
gene expression within colonies of the diazotroph,
Trichodesmium, from the Southwest Pacific Ocean.
ISME J 3: 1286 –1300.
Hmelo LR, Van Mooy BAS, Mincer TJ. (2012). Character-
ization of bacterial epibionts on the cyanobacterium
Trichodesmium. Aquat Microb Ecol 67:1 –14.
Hutchins DA, Walworth N G, Webb EA, Saito MA,
Moran D, McIlvin MR et al. (2015). Irreversibly increased
nitrogen fixation in Trichodesmium experimentally
adapted to elevated carbon dioxide.Nat Comm 6: 8155.
Hynes AM, Chappell PD, Dyhrman ST, Doney SC,
Webb EA. (2009). Cross-basin comparison of phos-
phorus stress and nitrogen fixation in Trichodesmium.
Limnol Oceanogr 54: 1438 –1448.
Johnson WM, Soule MCK, Kujawinski EB. (2016). Evi-
dence for quorum sensing and differential metabolite
production by a marine bacterium in response
to DMSP. ISME J 10:1 –13.
Kearse M, Moir R, Wilson A, Stones-Havas S, Cheung M,
Sturrock S et al. (2012). Geneious basic: an integrated
and extendable desktop software platform for the
organization and analysis of sequence data. BMC
Bioinform 28: 1647 –1649.
Keltjens JT, Pol A, Reimann J, Op Den Camp HJM. (2014).
PQQ-dependent methanol dehydrogenases: rare-earth
elements make a difference. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
98: 6163 –6183.
Kiene RP, Linn LJ. (2000). Distribution and turnover of
dissolved DMSP and its relationship with bacterial
production and dimethylsulfide in the Gulf of Mexico.
Limnol Oceanogr 45: 849 –861.
Kiene RP, Service SK. (1991). Decomposition of dissolved
DMSP and DMS in estuarine waters: dependence on
temperature and substrate concentration. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 76:1 –11.
Kozich JJ, Westcott SL, Baxter NT, Highlander SK,
Schloss PD. (2013). Development of a dual-index
sequencing strategy and curation pipeline for analyz-
ing amplicon sequence data on the MiSeq Illumina
sequencing platform. Appl Environ Microbiol 79:
5112–5120.
Kranzler C, Lis H, Shaked Y, Keren N. (2011). The role of
reduction in iron uptake processes in a unicellular,
planktonic cyanobacterium. Environ Microbiol 13:
2990–2999.
Kupper FC, Carrano CJ, Kuhn JU, Butler A. (2006).
Photoreactivity of iron(III)-aerobactin: photoproduct
structure and iron(III) coordination. Inorganic Chem
45: 6028 –6033.
Lachnit T, Blumel M, Imhoff JF, Wahl M. (2009). Specific
epibacterial communities on macroalgae: phylogeny
matters more than habitat. Aquat Biol 5: 181 –186.
Lachnit T, Meske D, Wahl M, Harder T, Schmitz R. (2011).
Epibacterial community patterns on marine macro-
algae are host-specific but temporally variable. Environ
Microbiol 13: 655 –665.
Langmead B, Salzberg SL. (2012). Fast gapped-read
alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat Methods 9: 357 –359.
Lee MD, Walworth NG, Sylvan JB, Edwards KJ, Orcutt BN.
(2015). Microbial communities on seafloor basalts at
Dorado Outcrop reflect level of alteration and highlight
global lithic clades. Front Microbiol 6:1 –20.
Liu Y, Harrison PM, Kunin V, Gerstein M. (2004).
Comprehensive analysis of pseudogenes in
prokaryotes: widespread gene decay and failure of
putative horizontally transferred genes. Genome Biol 5:
R64.
Markowitz VM, Mavromatis K, Ivanova NN, Chen IMA,
Chu K, Kyrpides NC. (2009). IMG ER: a system for
microbial genome annotation expert review and cura-
tion. Bioinformatics 25: 2271 –2278.
Mclellan SL, Newton RJ, Vandewalle JL, Shanks OC,
Huse SM, Eren AM et al. (2013). Sewage reflects the
distribution of human faecal Lachnospiraceae. Environ
Microbiol 15: 2213 –2227.
Mincer TJ, Aicher AC. (2016). Methanol production by a
broad phylogenetic array of marine phytoplankton.PLoS
One 11:1 –17.
Morris JJ. (2015). Black Queen evolution: the role of
leakiness in structuring microbial communities.
Trends Genet 31: 475 –482.
Morris JJ, Johnson ZI, Szul MJ, Keller M, Zinser ER. (2011).
Dependence of the cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus
The Trichodesmium consortium
MD Lee et al
1823
The ISME Journal
on hydrogen peroxide scavenging microbes for growth
at the ocean ’s surface. PLoS One 6: e16805.
Morris JJ, Kirkegaard R, Szul MJ, Johnson ZI, Zinser ER.
(2008). Facilitation of robust growth of Prochlorococ-
cus colonies and dilute liquid cultures by 'helper'
heterotrophic bacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol 74:
4530–4534.
Morris J, Lenski RE, Zinser ER. (2012). The Black Queen
hypothesis: evolution of dependencies through adap-
tive gene loss. Mol Bio 3: e00036 –12.
Mulholland MR, Bernhardt PW, Heil CA, Bronk DA,
Neil JMO. (2006). Nitrogen fixation and release of
fixed nitrogen by Trichodesmium spp. in the Gulf
of Mexico. Limnol Oceanogr 51: 1762 –1776.
Nausch M. (1996). Microbial activities on Trichodesmium
colonies. Mar Ecol Prog Series 141: 173 –181.
O’Neil JM, Roman MR. (1992). Grazers and associated
organisms of Trichodesmium. Marine Pelagic Cyanobac-
teria Trichodesmium Other Diazotrophs362:6 1–73.
Paerl H, Bebout B, Prufert L. (1989). Bacterial associations
with marine Oscillatoria sp. ( Trichodesmium sp.)
populations: ecophysiological implications. J Phyc
25: 773 –784.
Paerl HW, Bebout BM. (1988). Direct measurement of O2-
depleted microzones in marine Oscillatoria): relation
to N2-fixation. Science Wash 241: 442 –445.
Paerl HW, Kellar PE. (1978). Significance of bacterial-
Anabaena associations with respect to N2 fixation in
freshwater. J Phyc 14: 254 –260.
Paerl HW, Pinckney JL. (1996). A mini-review of microbial
consortia: their roles in aquatic production and
biogeochemical cycling. Microb Ecol 31: 225 –247.
Parada A, Needham DM, Fuhrman JA. (2015). Every base
matters: assessing small subunit rRNA primers for
marine microbiomes with mock communities, time-
series and global field samples. Environ Microbiol 18:
1403–1414.
Peng Y, Leung HCM, Yiu SM, Chin FYL. (2012). IDBA-UD:
a de novo assembler for single-cell and metagenomic
sequencing data with highly uneven depth. Bioinfor-
matics 28: 1420 –1428.
Prufert-Bebout L, Paerl HW, Lassen C. (1993). Growth,
nitrogen fixation, and spectral attenuation in cultivated
Trichodesmium species. Appl Envir Microbiol 59:
1367–1375.
Raina JB, Tapiolas D, Willis BL, Bourne DG. (2009). Coral-
associated bacteria and their role in the biogeochemical
cycling of sulfur. Appl Envir Microbiol 75: 3492–3501.
Roe KL, Barbeau KA. (2014). Uptake mechanisms for
inorganic iron and ferric citrate in Trichodesmium
erythraeum IMS101. Metallomics 6: 2042 –2051.
Rouco M, Haley ST, Dyhrman ST. (2016). Microbial
diversity within the Trichodesmium holobiont.
Environ Microbiol 18: 5151 –5160.
Sachs JL, Hollowell AC. (2012). The origins of cooperative
bacterial communities. Mol Bio 3: e00099 –12-e00099-
12.
Sañudo-Wilhelmy SA, Gómez-Consarnau L, Suffridge C,
Webb EA. (2014). The role of B vitamins in marine
biogeochemistry. Ann Rev Mar Sci 6: 339 –367.
Sapp M, Schwaderer AS, Wiltshire KH, Hoppe HG,
Gerdts G, Wichels A. (2007). Species-specific bacterial
communities in the phycosphere of microalgae?.
Microbial Ecol 53: 683 –699.
Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, Hall JR, Hartmann M,
Hollister EB et al. (2009). Introducing mothur:
open-source, platform-independent, community-
supported software for describing and comparing
microbial communities. App Environ Microbiol 75:
7537–7541.
Schwyn B, Neilands JB. (1987). ‘Universal chemical assay
for the detection and determination of siderophores.
Anal Biochem 160:4 7 –56.
Seymour JR. (2010). Chemoattraction to dimethylsulfonio-
propionate throughout the marine microbial food web.
Science 329: 342 –346.
Simo R. (2001). Production of atmospheric sulfur by
oceanic plankton: biogeochemical, ecological and
evolutionary links. Trends Ecol Evol 16: 287 –294.
Sison-mangus MP, Jiang S, Tran KN, Kudela RM. (2014).
Host-specific adaptation governs the interaction of the
marine diatom, Pseudo-nitzschia and their microbiota.
ISME J 8:6 3 –76.
Stefels J, Steinke M, Turner S, Malin G, Belviso S. (2007).
Environmental constraints on the production and
removal of the climatically active gas dimethylsul-
phide (DMS) and implications for ecosystem model-
ling. Biogeochem 83: 245 –275.
Stevenson BS, Waterbury JB. (2006). Isolation and identi-
fication of an epibiotic bacterium associated with
heterocystous Anabaena cells. Biol Bull 210:7 3 –77.
Stothard P. (2000). The sequence manipulation suite:
JavaScript programs for analyzing and formatting
protein and DNA sequences. Biotechniques 6:
1102–1104.
Van Mooy BAS, Hmelo LR, Sofen LE, Campagna SR,
May AL, Dyhrman ST et al. (2012). Quorum sensing
control of phosphorus acquisition in Trichodesmium
consortia. ISME J 6: 422 –429.
Vraspir JM, Butler A. (2009). Chemistry of marine ligands
and siderophores. Ann Rev Mar Sci 1:4 3 –63.
Walworth N, Pfreundt U, Nelson WC, Mincer T, Heidel-
berg JF, Fu F et al. (2015). Trichodesmium genome
maintains abundant, widespread noncoding DNA
in situ, despite oligotrophic lifestyle. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 112: 4251 –4256.
Waterbury JB. (2006). The Cyanobacteria - isolation,
purification and indentification. Prok 4: 1053 –1073.
Webb EA, Jakuba RW, Moffett JW, Dyhrman ST. (2007).
Molecular assessment of phosphorus and iron physiol-
ogy in Trichodesmium populations from the western
Central and western South Atlantic. Limnol Oceanogr
52: 2221 –2232.
Weber T, Blin K, Duddela S, Krug D, Kim HU, Bruccoleri R
et al. (2015). AntiSMASH 3.0-a comprehensive
resource for the genome mining of biosynthetic gene
clusters. Nucleic Acids Res 43: W237 –W243.
Yoch DC. (2002). Dimethylsulfoniopropionate: its sources,
role in the marine food web, and biological degrada-
tion to dimethylsulfide. Appl Environ Microbiol 68:
5804–5815.
Zehr JP. (1995). Nitrogen fixation in the sea: why
only Trichodesmium?. Molecular Ecol Aquat Micr
G38: 335 –364.
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on The ISME Journal website (http://www.nature.com/ismej)
The Trichodesmium consortium
MD Lee et al
1824
The ISME Journal
