1. Water Res. 2026 Sep 16;308(Pt B):126966. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2026.126966.
Online ahead of print.

Physiological adaptations of a minimal bacterial consortium enable robust
ammonia oxidation at extremely acidic pH.

Ni G(1), Su Z(2), Wang Y(2), Wang Z(2), Wu M(2), Hua Z(3), Leung PM(4), Op den
Camp HJM(5), Lücker S(5), Yuan Z(6), Hu S(2), Guo J(7), Greening C(8), Zheng
M(9).

Author information:
(1)Australian Centre for Water and Environmental Biotechnology, The University
of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 4072, Australia; Department of Microbiology,
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, 3800,
Australia; Nanyang Environment & Water Research Institute, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore, 637141, Singapore.
(2)Australian Centre for Water and Environmental Biotechnology, The University
of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 4072, Australia.
(3)Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Urban Pollutant Conversion,
Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, China.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash
University, Melbourne, VIC, 3800, Australia.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Radboud Institute for Biological and
Environmental Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, 6525AJ, the Netherlands.
(6)Australian Centre for Water and Environmental Biotechnology, The University
of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 4072, Australia; School of Energy and Environment,
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(7)Australian Centre for Water and Environmental Biotechnology, The University
of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 4072, Australia. Electronic address:
j.guo1@uq.edu.au.
(8)Department of Microbiology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash
University, Melbourne, VIC, 3800, Australia. Electronic address:
chris.greening@monash.edu.
(9)Australian Centre for Water and Environmental Biotechnology, The University
of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 4072, Australia; Water Research Centre, School of
Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW,
2052, Australia. Electronic address: min.zheng1@unsw.edu.au.

Microbial communities can efficiently mediate aerobic ammonia oxidation even at
acidic pH. However, little is known about the strategies that enable them to
simultaneously mitigate acidic and nitrosative stresses. Here, we integrate
genome-resolved meta-omic analyses with chemical measurements to infer the
composition, metabolic exchange, and stress adaptations of microbial consortia
in three acidic nitrification bioreactors operated between pH 2.0 and 5.0. At pH
5.0, the dominant ammonia-oxidising bacterium (AOB) across all conditions was a
novel Nitrosococcaceae species, designated "Candidatus Nitrosoglobus kelleri."
It reached a relative abundance of up to 56% and possessed genes for ammonia
oxidation, aerobic respiration, and carbon fixation. At pH 2.0, the community
was strongly simplified and dominated by "Ca. Nitrosoglobus kelleri" together
with Mycobacterium species; genome-resolved and transcriptional evidence
suggested potential metabolic linkages related to carbon and nitrogen compound
cycling. Both "Ca. Nitrosoglobus kelleri" and Mycobacterium spp. concurrently
activate metabolic mechanisms to maintain intracellular pH homeostasis, detoxify
reactive nitrogen species, and reinforce their cellular envelopes. Despite
inhabiting aerobic bioreactors, consortia members also expressed
denitrification genes at high levels, likely to eliminate reactive nitrogen
species such as nitrite and nitric oxide produced during incomplete
nitrification, with a trade-off in respiratory efficiency. Collectively, these
findings provide critical insights into the metabolic adaptations of
minimalistic microbial communities at extremely low pH. In addition to enhancing
understanding of microbial nitrogen cycling, this work has potential
implications for improving wastewater treatment technologies through acidic
nitrification processes.

Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2026.126966
PMID: 42762737

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper. Author on this paper Min Zheng and Jianhua Guo serve as editors of Water
Research. The manuscript has been handled and reviewed independently by other
editors of the journal, with Min Zheng and Jianhua Guo having no part in, or
visibility over evaluation and acceptance of this work.
