PMID- 41210787
OWN - NLM
STAT- PubMed-not-MEDLINE
DCOM- 20251112
LR  - 20251112
IS  - 2470-1343 (Electronic)
VI  - 10
IP  - 43
DP  - 2025 Nov 4
TI  - High-Performance Microbial Fuel Cell for Aromatic Hydrocarbon Bioremediation:
      Leveraging a Unique Mangrove-Derived Electrogenic Consortium.
PG  - 51074-51087
LID - 10.1021/acsomega.5c05703 [doi]
FAU - de Souza, Joao Carlos
AU  - de Souza JC
FAU - Bonizol Zani, Ana Clara
AU  - Bonizol Zani AC
FAU - Silva, Joao Pedro
AU  - Silva JP
FAU - Dos Santos, Amanda
AU  - Dos Santos A
FAU - Umbuzeiro, Gisela de Aragao
AU  - Umbuzeiro GA
FAU - Bueno, Andre Valente
AU  - Bueno AV
FAU - Lobo, Fernanda Leite
AU  - Lobo FL
FAU - Reginatto, Valeria
AU  - Reginatto V
FAU - de Andrade, Adalgisa Rodrigues
AU  - de Andrade AR
LA  - eng
PT  - Journal Article
DEP - 20251022
PL  - United States
TA  - ACS Omega
JT  - ACS omega
PMC - PMC12593025
AID - 10.1021/acsomega.5c05703 [doi]
PST - epublish
SO  - ACS Omega. 2025 Oct 22;10(43):51074-51087. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.5c05703.

===== CURATED OPEN-ACCESS EXCERPTS (Europe PMC PMC12593025) =====

High-Performance Microbial Fuel Cell for Aromatic Hydrocarbon Bioremediation: Leveraging a Unique Mangrove-Derived Electrogenic Consortium
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c05703

ABSTRACT

In this context, the present study aimed to obtain a novel electrogenic microbial consortium, sourced from mangrove sediments, capable of improving microbial fuel cell (MFC) performance in both energy generation and aromatic compound's biodegradation.

This new microbial consortium was tested in dual-chamber MFCs designed for the biodegradation of benzene, employed as a model aromatic compound.

During the initial acclimation phase using 1000.0 mg L-1 sodium acetate, the bacterial genera Arcobacter (20.2%) and Comamonas (11.0%) were predominant. As sodium acetate was progressively replaced and the MFC operated solely with benzene (330.0 mg L-1), Bacillus (32.9%) and Arcobacter (30.3%) became the dominant genera.

The MFC exhibited remarkable efficiency, achieving 98.7 ± 2.4% benzene removal within 96 h, while the output voltage increased from 568.0 ± 10.3 mV to 902.3 ± 20.6 mV as the feedstock shifted from sodium acetate to benzene.

The maximum power density, Coulombic efficiency, and MFC cumulative energy efficiency were 390.1 ± 26 mW m-2, 14.4%, and 17.8%, respectively.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

A mangrove sediment originating from Vitória, Espírito Santo State, Brazil (Latitude: 20°16′45.3′’S; Longitude: 40°18′27.4’’W) was used as inoculum in the MFCs.

To carry out the experiments, six two-compartment MFCs (8.6 cm × 6.5 cm × 6.5 cm) were assembled in acrylic compartments.

For this purpose, 50.0 mL of a 20.0% (m/v) suspension composed of mangrove sediment and Lovley and Phillips medium was transferred to the anodic compartment.

Initially, a concentration of 1000.0 mg L-1 of sodium acetate (SA) was used to feed the microorganisms over a period of 7 days.

SA was gradually replaced by benzene at concentrations representing 10.0%, 25.0%, 50.0%, 75.0%, and 100.0% of the total carbon content, corresponding to benzene concentrations of 30.0, 80.0, 170.0, 250.0, and 330.0 mg L-1, respectively.

As a control, a microbial fuel cell (MFC) without added sediment (abiotic condition), containing only the culture medium and the carbon source, was used.

All experiments were carried out at a controlled room temperature (25 +/- 2 deg C).

Maximum voltages observed in Cycles III, IV, V, VI, and VII were 678.5 ± 98.2, 542.4 ± 50.7, 768.6 ± 10.8, 902.3 ± 20.6, and 899.9 ± 15.2 mV, respectively.

MICROBIAL COMMUNITY

In the inoculum from mangrove sediment, the genus Sulfuvorum (31.45%) predominated, but a significant portion of the microorganisms remained unassigned (25.17%).

In the SA-fed MFC biofilm, the predominant genera were Arcobacter (20.23%) and Comamonas (11.03%).

In the benzene-fed MFC biofilm, Bacillus (32.93%) and Arcobacter (30.28%) predominated, comprising 63.21% of the microbial community.

The genera Pelobacter, Desulfurumonas, and Pseudomonas were also identified at 2.22, 1.64, and 0.87%, respectively.

Clearly, benzene addition has shifted the microbial community composition by diminishing Commamonas and enriching the Arcobacter and Bacillus populations.

The most expressive enrichment is observed in the genus Bacillus which relative abundance increases from 0.88 to 3.0% and then to 32.93% in the inoculum, SA-fed MFC biofilm, and benzene-fed MFC biofilm, respectively.

The genus Bacilllus is therefore important for degrading benzene.

the electrogenic Arcobacter abundance increased from 20.23% to 30.28%

BENZENE REMOVAL

Benzene biodegradation was monitored in the MFCs by GC-FID. The chromatograms showed that the benzene peak gradually decreased, confirming its biodegradation throughout the MFC operation (96 h).

The HPLC-RID chromatogram obtained for the products revealed the presence of two compounds: acetate and butyrate.

The percentage of benzene in the MFC decreased over time to 98.7 ± 2.4% after 96 h.

===== OPEN-ACCESS FULL TEXT (local file communitymech_acs_41210787.xml) =====

3686 acsomega ACS Omega ACS Omega American Chemical Society PMC12593025 12593025 12593025 41210787 10.1021/acsomega.5c05703 High-Performance
Microbial Fuel Cell for Aromatic
Hydrocarbon Bioremediation: Leveraging a Unique Mangrove-Derived Electrogenic
Consortium de Souza João Carlos † Bonizol Zani Ana Clara † Silva João Pedro ‡ dos Santos Amanda § Umbuzeiro Gisela de Aragão § Bueno André Valente ∥ Lobo Fernanda Leite ∥ Reginatto Valeria † de Andrade Adalgisa Rodrigues † *
 †
University
of São Paulo (USP), Faculty of Philosophy, Sciences and Letters at Ribeirão Preto
(FFCLRP), Department of Chemistry, Avenida Bandeirantes 3900, Ribeirão
Preto, São Paulo State
14040-900, Brazil

 ‡
Universidade
Estadual Paulista Julio de Mesquita Filho (UNESP), Instituto de Química, Departamento de Analítica, Rua Prof. Francisco Degni 55, Araraquara, São Paulo State
14800-060, Brazil

 §
State
University of Campinas, Faculty of Technology, Rua Paschoal Marmo 1888, Limeira, São Paulo State
13484-332, Brazil

 ∥
Federal
University of Ceará, Technology Center, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Avenida da Universidade 2853, Fortaleza, Ceará State
60020-181, Brazil
 *
E-mail: ardandra@usp.br . Tel.: + 55 16 3315-3725. 22 10 2025 10 43 51074 51074–51087 8 11 2025 © 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0 Abstract Enhancing bioelectrocatalytic activity to increase the
efficiency
of toxic compound biodegradation and energy generation continues to
be a critical challenge in bioelectrochemical systems. In this context,
the present study aimed to obtain a novel electrogenic microbial consortium,
sourced from mangrove sediments, capable of improving microbial fuel
cell (MFC) performance in both energy generation and aromatic compound’s
biodegradation. This new microbial consortium was tested in dual-chamber
MFCs designed for the biodegradation of benzene, employed as a model
aromatic compound. Overall, the results demonstrated that the enrichment
of a microbial community derived from mangrove sediments in the southeastern
region of Brazil (State of Espírito Santo) significantly enhanced
bioelectricity generation in MFCs via benzene biodegradation. During
the initial acclimation phase using 1000.0 mg L–1 sodium acetate, the bacterial genera Arcobacter (20.2%) and Comamonas (11.0%) were
predominant. As sodium acetate was progressively replaced and the
MFC operated solely with benzene (330.0 mg L–1), Bacillus (32.9%) and Arcobacter (30.3%) became the dominant genera. The MFC exhibited remarkable
efficiency, achieving 98.7 ± 2.4% benzene removal within 96 h,
while the output voltage increased from 568.0 ± 10.3 mV to 902.3
± 20.6 mV as the feedstock shifted from sodium acetate to benzene.
The maximum power density, Coulombic efficiency, and MFC cumulative
energy efficiency were 390.1 ± 26 mW m–2, 14.4%,
and 17.8%, respectively, surpassing previously established benchmarks
and improving power density by approximately 100-fold compared to
other devices. In conclusion, this innovative electrogenic microbial
consortium, characterized by its unique bacterial diversity, markedly
enhanced electron transfer, voltage, power density, and current generation
in MFCs. It represents a highly promising and sophisticated approach
for both substantial bioelectricity production and the effective bioremediation
of aromatics, especially benzene, a compound known for its extreme
toxicity, mutagenicity, and carcinogenicity. status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Received 2025 Jun 16; Accepted 2025 Oct 15; Revised 2025 Oct 10; Collection date 2025 Nov 4. 1. Introduction Rapid population growth,
intense urbanization, and the expansion
of industrialization, combined with an economy and lifestyle based
on consumption, have raised concerns among leaders, researchers, and
experts from various fields of knowledge around the world regarding
the adequacy of the current energy supply to sustain the production
chain and related activities.
 Currently,
the primary sources of energy in use largely depend
on the combustion of fossil fuels, such as oil, coal, and natural
gas. However, both the extraction and
combustion of these fuels result in significant harm to public health
and the environment as a whole.
−

 Particularly noteworthy is the rising incidence of
soil, water, and air contamination caused by petroleum and its derivatives,
such as benzene, which are often linked to oil extraction, refining,
spills, improper disposal of petroleum industry waste, and emissions
from engine combustion.
,−

 Benzene
is a highly genotoxic, mutagenic, carcinogenic, and toxic
compound that presents significant challenges for treatment and removal.
,−

 Furthermore, it contributes to environmental degradation by depleting
the ozone layer, exacerbating the greenhouse effect, and promoting
acid rain formation.
,

 In this context, bioelectrochemical
devices, such as microbial
fuel cells (MFCs), have garnered considerable attention as a promising
alternative for clean energy generation, alongside the simultaneous
bioremediation and biodegradation of compounds that pose serious risks
to human health and the environment. This is because various types
of waste or contaminants can serve as substrates or fuel sources in
MFCs.
−

 In summary, MFCs are bioelectrochemical systems capable of converting
the chemical energy of pollutants into electrical energy through their
oxidation, using microorganisms as biocatalysts.
 Nonetheless, the low power density generated by MFCs
remains a
significant challenge, hindering their large-scale implementation. To address this limitation, research efforts
have focused on developing new MFC designs with varying sizes and
materials, implementing continuous feeding strategies with one or
multiple substrates, coupling MFCs in series or parallel configurations,
employing diverse substances in the medium composition, and optimizing
the structural configuration of cathodes and anodes to reduce internal
resistance and enhance electron transfer. Additionally, advancements
include the incorporation of suitable microbial consortia to improve
MFC performance.
,−

 Recently, several microbial species have been isolated, and
their
ability to degrade highly toxic compounds, such as benzene and its
derivatives, in different matrices has been extensively investigated.
Pseudomonas has
been the most studied genus in this context,
−

 although other
bacterial species, such as Rhodococcus rhodochrous,
Acinetobacter baumannii,
Geobacter,
Microbacterium esteraromaticum SBS1-720,
Paraburkholderia
aromaivorans, and Variovorax paradoxus
 have also been subjects of investigation. Another crucial
aspect that determines microbial fuel cell (MFC)
performance is the delivery of electrons from microorganisms to the
electrode, a process known as extracellular electron transfer (EET). Shewanella and Geobacter species, both Gram-negative bacteria, have served as model organisms
for studying EET due to their distinct mechanisms. Shewanella species utilize outer membrane vesicles
connected to outer membrane extensions. These electron-rich extensions
facilitate electron delivery to an extracellular acceptor. In contrast, Geobacter species utilize conductive protein filaments
as cellular extensions. These filaments, identified as conductive
pili (or e-pili), are composed of micrometer-long chains of cytochromes.
 Although still not extensively explored,
electron transfer in Gram-positive
bacteria has been studied, and some research has demonstrated the
exoelectrogenic potential of Bacillus species in MFCs.
−

 For instance, electron transfer in Bacillus cereus is achieved through a dual mechanism.
One method involves direct contact, requiring the alignment of the
cytochrome complex, while the other is indirect, involving the release
of flavin molecules into the solution, which act as mediators. In addition, the genus Bacillus has also been identified as capable of degrading poorly degradable
molecules. In this context, Duarte-Urbina
et al. developed a bioanode using biochar-based
catalysts derived from onion waste, combined with a Bacillus subtilis strain, for the treatment of pharmaceutical
waste in MFCs. The study showed the formation of a stable biofilm
with good electron transfer capacity, achieving a power density of
30.72 mW m–2 and a 42.4% reduction in chemical oxygen
demand after 14 days of operation. Guo et al.40 evaluated
the performance of Bacillus cereus in
oily sludge treatment and energy generation. The results demonstrated
that the bacterium alone achieved 87.76% oil removal and a maximum
power density of 65 mW m–². Wongbunmak et al. investigated both the capacity and degradation
pathway of benzene and its derivatives using the Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum W1 strain in a
nonbioelectrochemical system. Their results demonstrated approximately
50% degradation of benzene and its derivatives after 7 days. Furthermore, given that EET can occur in both redox directions,
microorganisms are capable of direct cell-to-cell electron transfer,
where one bacterium acts as the electron acceptor and another as the
electron donor. Therefore, the discovery of new microbial consortia
is of paramount importance, as it is the electrogenic microorganisms
that transfer electrons from degraded compounds through oxidation,
thereby enabling the generation of electricity in MFCs.
−

 Consequently, the present study proposes a highly promising and
viable approach to enhance both bioelectricity generation and benzene
(as a model) biodegradation in MFCs through the tailoring of a novel
microbial consortium derived from mangrove sediments. 2. Materials and Methods 2.1. Reagents and Solutions All the reagents
were of analytical grade. The aqueous solutions were prepared by using
ultrapure water from a Milli-Q System (Millipore). Benzene (C6H6, 99.0%) was obtained from Exôdo Científica.
Potassium ferricyanide (K3Fe­(CN)6, 99.0%) and
potassium ferrocyanide (K4Fe­(CN)6, 99.0%) were
acquired from Qhemis. Hydrochloric acid (HCl, 36.5–38.0%) was
purchased from Vetec. Potassium chloride (KCl, 99.5%), potassium bicarbonate
(KHCO3, 99.5%), sodium hydrogen phosphate (Na2HPO4, 99.0%), sodium dihydrogen phosphate dihydrate (NaH2PO4.2H2O, 99.0%), ammonium chloride
(NH4Cl, 99.5%), magnesium sulfate (MgSO4, 99.5%),
manganese chloride tetrahydrate (MnCl2.4H2O),
sodium molybdate dihydrate (NaMoO4.2H2O, 99.5%),
and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.5%) were supplied by Sigma-Aldrich.
Ethanol (C2H6O, 100.0%), nitric acid (HNO3, 65.0%), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, 100.0
volumes), sulfuric acid (H2SO4, 95.0–97.0%),
sodium acetate (C2H3NaO2, 99.0%),
sodium chloride (NaCl, 99.5%), and sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 98.0%)
were obtained from Merck. Magnesium chloride (MgCl2, 99.0–102.0%)
and calcium chloride dihydrate (CaCl2.2H2O,
99.0–105.0%) were acquired from Synth. Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3, 100.2%) was purchased from J. T. Baker. The yeast extract
was obtained from Kasvi. The Lovley and Phillips culture medium
used in the experiments was prepared by employing the following mixture
(g L–1): NaHCO3 (2.5), Na2HPO4 (0.74), NaH2PO4.2H2O (0.6), NH4Cl (1.5), MgCl2 (0.1), MgSO4 (0.1), yeast extract (0.05), CaCl2.2H2O (0.1), KCl (0.1), NaCl (0.1), NaMoO4.2H2O
(0.001), and MnCl2.4H2O (0.005).
 2.2. MFC Structure To carry out the experiments,
six two-compartment MFCs (8.6 cm × 6.5 cm × 6.5 cm) were
constructed by using acrylic ( Figure
 ). 1 Schematic representation of the MFCs. The anode compartment (4.8 cm × 6.5 cm ×
6.5 cm), with
a volumetric capacity of 50 mL, was equipped with an anode consisting
of a carbon fiber brush (3.0 cm × 2.0 cm) connected to a titanium
rod (Research Laboratory Shop, China), which was linked to the cathode
through an external resistor of 1000 Ω, positioned at a distance
of 0.5 cm. The cathode compartment (3.8 cm × 6.5 cm × 6.5
cm) contained perforations allowing contact with the ambient atmosphere.
The cathodes were composed of a carbon cloth (15 cm2) modified
with 40% platinum (A6 ELAT-BASF), which was hot-pressed at 130 °C
and under 35 kgf cm2 onto a treated Nafion proton exchange
membrane (NRE-212/Aldrich). Prior to assembly and use, both
the MFC units and the anode and
cathode components were immersed for 24 h in a 20.0% (v/v) HNO3 solution, followed by thorough rinsing with ultrapure water.
Specifically, the anodes were subjected to an additional heat treatment
in a muffle furnace at 450 °C for 45 min after rinsing. The voltage generated by the MFCs was recorded in real time every
15 min using an Arduino Mega 2560 microcontroller board (ATmega2560)
connected to a microcomputer. 2.3. Biofilm Growth on the Anode and MFC Functioning A mangrove sediment originating from Vitória, Espírito
Santo State, Brazil (Latitude: 20°16′45.3′’S;
Longitude: 40°18′27.4’’W) was used as inoculum
in the MFCs. For this purpose, 50.0 mL of a 20.0% (m/v) suspension
composed of mangrove sediment and Lovley and Phillips medium was transferred
to the anodic compartment. Initially, a concentration of 1000.0
mg L–1 of sodium acetate (SA) was used to feed the
microorganisms over a period of 7 days. On the third day, an additional supply of SA was introduced. After
8 days, the original solution and sediments in the anode compartment
were removed, and a fresh solution of the culture medium, along with
SA, was added. To establish a stable biofilm, two consecutive
feeding cycles with
sodium acetate (SA) were conducted at intervals of 3 to 5 days, initiated
whenever a decrease in output voltage was observed. Subsequently,
SA was gradually replaced by benzene at concentrations representing
10.0%, 25.0%, 50.0%, 75.0%, and 100.0% of the total carbon content,
corresponding to benzene concentrations of 30.0, 80.0, 170.0, 250.0,
and 330.0 mg L–1, respectively. As a control, a
microbial fuel cell (MFC) without added sediment (abiotic condition),
containing only the culture medium and the carbon source, was used.
All experiments were carried out at a controlled room temperature
(25 ± 2 °C). 2.4. MFC Electrochemical Characterization The electrochemical measurements were carried out using an AUTOLAB
potentiostat/galvanostat, model PGSTAT 30 (Metrohm AUTOLAB, Switzerland),
connected to a microcomputer. To obtain and interpret the data, the
NOVA 2.10 software was used. Cyclic voltammetry measurements
were conducted at a scan rate (ν) of 1 mV s–1 within the MFC itself, using the Lovley and Phillips medium as the
supporting electrolyte. These measurements were carried out in the
presence of sodium acetate (SA), benzene, or under abiotic conditions.
An Ag/AgCl(sat) electrode (3.0 mol L–1 KCl) served as the reference electrode The power density tests
of the MFC were determined under potentiostatic
conditions using linear sweep voltammetry at ν = 1 mV s–1. Initially, the MFCs were maintained at open circuit
potential (OCP) for 3 h or until the voltage stabilized. Measurements
were then conducted by sweeping the potential from OCP to zero voltage.
Power density was calculated using eq
 :
 1 P = i U A where P is the power
density (W m–2), i is the current
(A), U is the
cell voltage (V), and A is the anode geometric area
(m2). The internal resistance of each MFC was calculated
by using eq
 :
 2 R i n t = U i − R e x t where Rint is the
internal resistance (Ω)
and Rext is the external resistance (Ω). Chronoamperometric measurements were conducted in the MFC at a
fixed potential of 0.2 V vs Ag/AgCl(sat) (3.0 mol L–1 KCl) for a duration of 3600 s, using the Lovley and
Phillips medium as the supporting electrolyte. These measurements
were performed in the presence of either sodium acetate (SA) or benzene. The coulombic efficiency (CE) of the benzene-fed MFC was calculated
by using eq
 :
 3 C E = M M s × I × t F × b × V × Δ C where MMs is the substrate
molar mass (benzene
= 78.11 g mol–1), I is the current
(A), t is the time (s), F is the
Faraday constant (96485 C mol–1), b is the total number of electrons produced for substrate oxidation
(n = 30 for benzene total oxidation), V is the MFC anodic compartment volume (L), and ΔC is the substrate concentration (g L–1). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were
carried out at OCP under the same conditions described previously.
The frequency was varied from 60 kHz to 0.01 Hz, with ten frequency
values per decade, using a root-mean-square sinusoidal disturbance
(r.m.s.) with an amplitude of 10 mV. The electrochemical surface
area (ECSA) of the carbon fiber brush
in the absence and presence of biofilm was calculated by using eq
 :
 4 E C S A = C d l C s where Cdl
 is the double layer capacitance
and Cs
 is the graphite-specific capacitance
(0.0043 mF cm–2).
 2.5. Anode Surface Morphological Characterization The surface of the anode was characterized using scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) both before and after biofilm formation and acclimatization
in the presence of SA or benzene. A Carl Zeiss scanning electron microscope,
model EVO 50 (Cambridge, United Kingdom), in high vacuum mode (10–5 Torr), with an electron beam acceleration voltage
of 20 kV and equipped with a secondary electron detector, was used.
For this purpose, carbon fiber brush filaments were immersed in an
Eppendorf flask containing 2.0% (m/v) glutaraldehyde at 4 °C
for 3 h. Then, the filaments were treated with 1.0% (m/v) osmium tetroxide
for 2 h. To preserve the microorganism shape, the biofilm present
on the filaments was dehydrated by employing different water/ethanol
ratios and subsequently dried to the critical point. Finally, the
dried filaments were coated with gold by the sputtering technique
(Bal-tec, SCD 050, Fürstenstein, Liechtenstein). Subsequently,
bacterial viability before and after biofilm formation with SA and
benzene was assessed by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM)
analysis using a LIVE/DEAD Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit (Invitrogen,
Thermo Fisher Scientific). For CLSM analyses, an AxioObserver inverted
microscope, model LSM 780, from Carl Zeiss (Jena, Germany), was used.
The viability kit contains calcein-AM, which presents a green fluorescence
when staining live bacterial cells. In contrast, the bacterial viability
kit also contains ethidium homodimer-1, which presents red fluorescence
when staining dead bacterial cells.
 2.6. Bioanode Microbial Diversity Analysis Samples of the inoculum, the biofilm formed in the SA, and benzene
were evaluated for microbial diversity. The bioanodes formed
in the MFC were vortexed for two 5 min intervals in sterile 0.9% (m/v)
NaCl to obtain the cells that remained attached to the anode. Metagenomic DNA was extracted from centrifuged anodic biofilm pellets
by using the ZymoBIOMICSTM DNA Miniprep Kit (Zymo Research).
The DNA samples were quantified and analyzed for quality and quantity.
Then, the DNA samples were subjected to amplification of the entire
16S rRNA gene by employing primers 27F and 1492R (∼1.6 kb fragment).
The amplicons were visualized on agarose gel and quantified. The resulting
fragments were used to construct sequencing libraries and were sequenced
on the MinION platform (Oxford Nanopore) by employing Flongle Flow
Cells (FLO-FLG001). The resulting reads, obtained after sequencing,
were subjected
to base calling by using the Guppy Basecaller GPU version (v.6.0.7).
Furthermore, the reads were filtered for quality control in Q10 by
employing NanoFilt (v.2.3.0), demultiplexed with Porechop (v.0.2.4),
and mapped to the 16S reference database by using the KMA tool (v.1.4.3).
The data were analyzed by employing Python 3.7. 2.7. Monitoring Benzene Biodegradation and Products Benzene biodegradation in the MFC was monitored by gas chromatography
coupled to a flame ionization detector (GC-FID). For this, an analytical
methodology adapted from Souza et al. was
used. For the analysis, a Shimadzu chromatograph model GC-2010 Plus,
Restek Rtx – Biodiesel TG chromatographic column (5% diphenyl–95%
dimethyl polysiloxane cross-linked; 10 m × 0.32 mm i.d., 0.10
μm d.f.), and nitrogen (purity 99.995%) at a flow rate of 1.0
mL min–1 as a carrier gas, were employed.
The column and injector temperatures were kept constant at 40.0 and
240.0 °C, respectively. The injector was operated in split mode
(1:50). Benzene was detected and quantified by using the headspace
technique in an automatic headspace injector (CTC Analytics –
Combi Pal). For this purpose, 2.0 mL of the sample was transferred
to a closed bottle (10 mL). Subsequently, the bottle was heated under
stirring at 65.0 °C for 5 min. Then, the volatile fraction was
injected into the GC and analyzed. Monitoring of the products
in solution was carried out by high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC), using a Shimadzu HPLC system, model
LC-20AT, coupled to a refractive index detector (RID). To conduct
HPLC-RID analysis, MFC medium samples were collected in different
periods, filtered through 0.22 μm syringe filters, and analyzed
directly. The separation was performed on an Aminex HPX-87H ion exclusion
column (300 × 7.8 mm), combined with a cation H column guard
(30 × 4.6 mm). The analysis was carried out in isocratic mode
with a mobile phase composed of 5.0 mmol L–1 H2SO4, flow rate of 0.6 mL min–1, a column temperature of 60 °C, and an injection volume of
10.0 μL. Monitoring of the products in the gaseous fraction
was carried
out by gas chromatography coupled to a thermal conductivity detector
(GC-TCD), using a Shimadzu gas chromatograph, model GC-2014. To carry
out the analyses, a volume of 50.0 μL of the MFC gas fraction
was collected with a GC injection syringe and injected directly into
the gas chromatograph. Separation was performed on a Restek Shin Carbon
ST – Micropacked chromatographic column (SilcoSmooth Tubing
Mesh: 100/120 OD: 1/16”; 2 m length × 1.0 mm i.d.). Analysis
was performed in splitless mode with the compound carrier gas argon
(99.9995%), a flow rate of 10.0 mL min–1, a column
temperature of 50.0 °C, and a detector temperature of 80.0 °C.
LabSolutions software was also used for data acquisition and processing. All measurements were performed in triplicate, and quantifications
were carried out using analytical curves developed for each identified
product. 2.8. Acute Toxicity Tests Initially, the
pure Lovley and Phillips medium was diluted in synthetic culture medium
for Daphnia similis
 at concentrations of 0.1, 0.3, 1.0, 3.3, and 10.0% (v/v)
to test for toxicity. Subsequently, the toxicity of the Lovley
and Phillips medium in the presence of benzene at 0.33, 1.1, 3.3,
11.0, and 33.0 mg L–1 and after benzene degradation
in the MFC was evaluated. To this end, both media were diluted in
synthetic medium for D. similis at
3.3% (v/v) in the presence of 0.01% (v/v) DMSO.
−

 Synthetic medium was used as the negative control, and 0.01%
(v/v) DMSO in synthetic medium was used as blank.
D. similis cultivation and acute
toxicity tests were carried out according to ABNT NBR 12713:2022 and OECD guidelines 202. NaCl was used as a reference to monitor culture sensitivity,
and only cultures within the acceptable range were employed in the
test. The neonates (n = 20, ≤24 h) were obtained
from two- to three-week-old mothers and transferred to four replicates
for each concentration. The tests were performed at 21 ± 1 °C,
under a 16-h light and 8-h dark cycle, and the number of immobile
organisms was recorded after 48 h. Mortality above 10% indicates toxicity. 3. Results and Discussion 3.1. MFC Performance Biofilm formation,
development, and stability were evaluated by monitoring the output
voltage of the MFC during its operation. Figure
 presents the voltage profiles generated
by both the control and biotic MFCs. 2 Voltage measurements of the abiotic control
() and MFCs () during feed
cycles with 1000.0
mg L–1 SA (I and II) and
benzene at 30.0 (III), 80.0 (IV), 170.0
(V), 250.0 (VI), and 330.0 mg L–1 (VII) in Lovley and Phillips medium. Conditions: Rext = 1000 Ω. Cycles I and II ( Figure
 ), conducted with 1000.0 mg L–1 of sodium
acetate (SA), exhibited maximum voltages of 470.5 ± 25.1 mV and
568.0 ± 10.3 mV, respectively. Starting from Cycle III, SA was
gradually replaced by benzene, facilitating the acclimatization of
the biofilm and preserving the MFC’s energy generation efficiency. This strategy mitigates the effects of molecular
recalcitrance and reduces the acute toxicity of benzene to microorganisms.
Maximum voltages observed in Cycles III, IV, V, VI, and VII were 678.5
± 98.2, 542.4 ± 50.7, 768.6 ± 10.8, 902.3 ± 20.6,
and 899.9 ± 15.2 mV, respectively. The voltage outputs
recorded for the MFCs indicated the development
of an electroactive biofilm; also, the abiotic MFC control does not
signalize any voltage ( Figure
 ). Biofilm formation follows a cyclical pattern involving
interactions between microorganisms and the anode surface,
−

 which corresponds to the voltage increase observed in Cycle II (21.0%
higher than Cycle I). Remarkably, the introduction of benzene (30.0
mg L–1) in Cycle III led to a further voltage increase
compared to the previous cycles, indicating a stable biofilm. Although
the benzene concentration was still low (30.0 mg L–1), the biofilm demonstrated a promising level of adaptability to
the new substrate. In Cycle IV, the voltage decreased slightly,
probably due to the
increased amount of benzene (80.0 mg L–1). This
may have inhibited the electrogenic microorganisms, which were not
yet fully adapted to the increased presence of benzene. After Cycle
V, the voltage increased considerably (42.0% compared to Cycle IV),
even with the addition of a higher concentration of benzene, indicating
that the biofilm had adapted well to this toxic compound. Biofilm
regeneration was evaluated in the presence of SA (1000.0
mg L–1) and benzene (330.0 mg L–1) by cycling the MFC from external load (Rext =
1000 Ω) to short-circuit (Rext = 0) every 24
h during a single-batch experiment. As shown in Figures S1 and S2 for SA and benzene, respectively, the voltage
output stabilized 24 h after feeding. After removing the external
resistance, there was an increase in voltage. Without external resistance,
electron flow is maximized at the anode, increasing the potential
difference. At this point, electrogenic microorganisms compete for
the substrate equally with other suspended microorganisms present
in the MFC. However, when reconnecting
the external resistance, the activity of electrogenic bacteria adhered
to the anode surface is privileged. This
demonstrates that the microorganisms are able to self-regulate accordingly
to produce energy. Furthermore, they were adapted to the presence
of benzene as a new carbon source, forming a very conductive, electroactive,
and stable biofilm with excellent reactivation and energy production. 3.2. MFC Electrochemical Characterization Initially, cyclic voltammetry measurements at ν = 1 mV s–1 were performed in the MFC itself in order to evaluate
the electrochemical behavior of the anode before and after biofilm
formation. A Lovley and Phillips culture medium was used as a supporting
electrolyte in the presence of SA (1000.0 mg L–1) or benzene (330.0 mg L–1). The voltammograms
obtained are shown in Figure S3 ( Supporting Information ). The voltammograms
obtained in the absence of biofilm (abiotic condition) did not show
anodic oxidation or cathodic reduction peaks. In the presence of biofilm
(biotic condition), anodic and cathodic peaks emerged for both SA
and benzene ( Figure S3 ). In the presence
of SA alone ( Figure S3A ), the oxidation
and reduction peaks appeared around 0.19 V vs. Ag/AgCl(sat) (I = 1.87 ± 0.31 mA) and −0.27 V vs. Ag/AgCl(sat) (I = 1.29 ± 0.17 mA), respectively.
In the presence of benzene ( Figure S3B ),
higher currents emerged; the oxidation peak appeared at 0.16 V vs. Ag/AgCl(sat) (I = 3.47 ± 0.54 mA) and
the reduction peak around −0.38 V vs. Ag/AgCl(sat) (I = 1.68 ± 0.23 mA). These results showed that
a conductive and electrochemically active biofilm formed on the anode
surface for both SA and benzene. Although these redox potentials are
compatible with direct electron transfer (DET) due to membrane-bound
redox proteins, as reported previously, considering that the biofilm is formed by microbial consortia, where
electron transfer often involves complex and cooperative interactions
between different species, we cannot rule out that bacteria and the
electrode may also exchange electrons by mediated electron transfer
(MET).
,,

 During
DET, the cell membrane and electrode surface are in direct
contact because electron transport occurs mainly via redox proteins
(c-type cytochromes) or the electroconductive pili (type IV pili,
also known as e-pili) of proteins present in these microorganisms
(PilA protein).
−

 On the other hand, during MET, electron transfer is assisted by
a mediator molecule that is generally excreted by the microorganisms.
,
 In this process, microorganisms transfer the electrons generated
during their metabolism to a mediator molecule, which becomes reduced.
The reduced mediator then migrates to the surface of the anode, where
it donates the electrons to the external circuit and is reoxidized
in the process. It subsequently returns to the microbial cell, where
it is reduced again, thus restarting the electron transfer cycle.
,

 Well-characterized model organisms, such as Geobacter
sulfurreducens and Shewanella oneidensis MR-1, provided insights into these mechanisms. G.
sulfurreducens performs direct electron transfer (DET)
via multiheme cytochromes C and type IV pili (e-pili) composed of
the PilA protein.
,,
 However, the mechanism is still debated. Some studies propose that
stacked π orbitals of aromatic residues in PilA facilitate conduction,
while others suggest that micrometer-long filaments of polymerized
hexaheme cytochrome OmcS are responsible for long-range electron transport.
,
 In contrast, S. oneidensis employs
both direct and mediated strategies. Its porin-cytochrome complex
MtrCAB spans the outer membrane, enabling electron flow through a
20-heme relay and can also release soluble flavins to transport electrons
to electrodes or other microbes.
,

 While
these models offer more well-established mechanistic insights,
microbial consortia present a more complex context for EET. In such
communities, extracellular electron flow often results from cooperative
and syntrophic interactions between diverse species, forming an interspecific
electron transfer (IET). A notable example
of extracellular EET was reported between G. sulfurreducens and Clostridium pasteurianum, in
which Geobacter e-pili enabled direct
electron transfer between species, avoiding the need for exogenous
mediators and enhancing the potential for metabolic cooperation and
complex electron networks within consortia, especially under diverse
environmental or substrate conditions.
 When compared to well-established electroactive bacteria such
as G. sulfurreducens and S. oneidensis MR-1, the mangrove-derived microbial
consortium investigated here
offers a distinct ecological and metabolic profile. While Geobacter and Shewanella have clearly defined EET pathways and typically require simple substrates
such as acetate or lactate, the studied consortium thrives on complex
carbon sources such as benzene. As shown in Section
 , the biofilm communities formed solely
with benzene (330.0 mg L–1) exhibited a strong enrichment
of Bacillus sp. The dominance of the
genus Bacillus and other potential
electroactive bacteria, such as Arcobacter, suggests an alternative EET, potentially involving DET and biofilm-based
conduction. Arcobacter species are
reported to perform EET through mechanisms that likely involve direct
contact with external electron acceptors, facilitated by proteins
such as multiheme c-type cytochromes, and potentially enhanced by
structures like flagella that aid in biofilm formation and interaction
with surfaces.
 SEM and CLSM images
were obtained for the anode surface before
and after biofilm formation ( Figure
 ). 3 SEM images illustrating the anode surface prior to (A)
and following
biofilm formation in the presence of SA (B) and benzene (C,D), along
with CLSM images of the anode surface before (E) and after biofilm
formation in the presence of SA (F) and benzene (G). Before biofilm formation, the carbon fiber brush
used as an anode
had bristles with a smooth and uniform surface ( Figure
 A). After biofilm growth with SA, clusters
of rod-shaped bacterial cells of different sizes were observed attached
to the surface of the anode bristles ( Figure
 B). However, in some regions, the clusters
were interconnected by nanowire networks ( Figure
 C,D), indicating that electron transfer may
have occurred preferentially via DET on the anode surface. The ability
of bacteria to transfer electrons via DET may favor the degradation
of complex pollutant compounds, such as benzene. Therefore, electron
transfer may have occurred via both DET and MET, since both can coexist
in a mixed culture of microorganisms.
,

 Furthermore,
bacterial viability before and after biofilm formation
with SA and benzene can be observed ( Figure
 E–G, respectively). Before biofilm
formation ( Figure
 E), there was no strong fluorescence, indicating low bacterial viability
on the anode surface. However, after biofilm formation and growth
with SA ( Figure
 F),
clusters of strong green fluorescence were observed with small spots
of red fluorescence, indicating strong bacterial viability composed
mainly of clusters of living organisms. Finally, for the biofilm
in the presence of benzene ( Figure
 G), a greater spreading and
greater bacterial viability were also observed, accompanied by a decrease
in dead organisms compared to the biofilm in SA. Therefore, it can
be inferred that a bacterial biofilm was formed and that bacterial
activity is essentially established after the bacterial biofilm growth
process. In addition, high biocompatibility of microorganisms can
be observed both in the presence of SA and in the presence of benzene,
since the biofilm formed is composed mainly of living organisms.
 Figure
 shows the
polarization and power density (A) and chronoamperometric (B) curves
for the MFC fed with SA (1000.0 mg L–1) or benzene
(330.0 mg L–1). The polarization curve is generally
divided into three regions. In the first region, located at lower
current densities, polarization is activated, and the cell potential
decreases. The second region, at moderate current densities, is closely
related to the ohmic loss domain, but the cell potential drops more
slowly and linearly. In the third region, at higher current densities,
the cell potential drop loses linearity and is limited by pronounced
concentration polarization.
−

 4 Polarization and power density (A) and
chronoamperometric (B) curves
of the MFC operating with the Lovley and Phillips medium (control
- inset) and fed with 1000.0 mg L–1 SA () or benzene 330.0 mg L–1 (). The polarization and power density curves ( Figure
 A) under abiotic
and biotic conditions were
symmetric, exhibited no hysteresis, and displayed only the first two
overpotential regions. The maximum power density obtained from the
polarization curves ( Figure
 A) was 4.8 ± 2, 238.8 ± 19, and 390.1 ± 26
mW m–2 for the control, SA, and benzene-fed MFC,
respectively. Since there is no biofilm and no electron flow,
the power density
curve under abiotic conditions represents only the capacitive current.
This is also evidenced by the absence of voltage generation in the
MFC, as shown in Figure
 . However, when we introduced SA into the MFC, the power density
increased by 49.8 times. The subsequent introduction of benzene as
a substrate almost doubled (1.6 times) the power density compared
to SA and provided a power density 80.6 times higher compared to abiotic
conditions. The power curve profiles reinforced those previously
observed by
cyclic voltammetry measurements ( Figure S3 ), in which the hypothesis of biofilm formation plays an important
role in the electron flow and energy generation in the system. However,
it is worth highlighting that biofilm thickness and density can affect
and interfere with electronic transfer, thereby offering greater resistance
to electron flow, reducing diffusion, and limiting the increase in
current.
 The internal resistance
(Rint) of the MFC is a
crucial parameter and cannot be ignored or neglected.
,
 The Rint values of each MFC were obtained by considering
only the region corresponding to the ohmic drops (second region). Rint values of 643 ± 58, 205 ± 42, and 146 ±
34 Ω were obtained for the control, SA-fed, and benzene-fed
MFCs, respectively. The biofilm significantly decreased the Rint of
the MFC by 3.1-fold for the SA-fed MFC and by 4.5-fold for the benzene-fed
MFC, demonstrating once again that the biofilm formed was highly conductive
and facilitated electron transfer. In the absence of biofilm,
the residual charge was 419.7 ±
157 mC. The charge increased substantially in the presence of biofilm
to 6406.2 ± 341 and 9169.6 ± 493 mC for the SA-fed ( Figure
 B – red line)
and benzene-fed ( Figure
 B – gray line) MFC, respectively. Compared to the control
MFC (abiotic system), the residual charge increased 15.2- and 21.9-fold
for the SA-fed and benzene-fed MFC, respectively. Electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy (EIS) highlights the anode
surface changes before and after biofilm formation. EIS measurements
were performed at OCP, and the potential values were 0.094, −0.461,
and −0.460 V for the control, the MFC fed with SA, and benzene,
respectively. The EIS complex plane graphs ( Figure S4 ) showed a semicircle at high frequencies, related
to the charge
transfer reaction, while the line at low frequencies was associated
with the diffusion-limited oxidation process. For the control MFC, this line was not pronounced, indicating that
diffusion was hampered. Moreover, the control MFC ( Figure S4 −inset EIS spectrum – black) displayed
a larger diameter semicircle and consequently a larger Rct (1442.8 Ω), suggesting that the carbon fiber brush (anode)
surface hindered electron transfer. The EIS complex plane for
the MFC in the presence of biofilm ( Figure S4 ) showed that the diameter of the semicircle
decreased compared to the control MFC, resulting in Rct values of 28.5 and 9.6 Ω for the SA- and benzene-fed MFCs,
respectively. The formation of a highly electroactive and conductive
biofilm ultimately facilitates charge transfer. These Rct values confirmed that benzene promoted a more active and conductive
biofilm, corroborating previous results. Nevertheless, solution
resistance (Rs) decreased
in the presence of biofilm, from 7.7 Ω (control MFC) to 1.25
Ω (SA-fed MFC) and 1.16 Ω (benzene-fed MFC), indicating
that the biofilm made the solution less resistive. In addition, the
double-layer capacitance (Cdl) increased slightly,
from 0.11 mF cm–2 in the control MFC to 0.16 and
0.18 mF cm–2 in the SA- and benzene-fed MFC, respectively. Cdl increased in the presence of biofilm probably because
the microorganisms formed a structured and dense nanowire network
together with the carbon fiber brush bristles ( Figure
 C,D). In the double layer, charge is formed
by intra and extracellular electron storage mechanisms originating
from the microorganism extracellular components, such as metabolites
and/or physical appendages or pili. The resulting nanowire network
would conduct the electrons, functioning as a nanonetwork with conductivity
close to metallic conductivity and transferring electrons further
away through the biofilm. ECSA values
of 25.6, 37.2, and 41.9 cm2 was obtained for the carbon
fiber brush without biofilm and in the presence of SA and benzene,
respectively. The stability and voltage, under maximum current
flow (Rext = 0), of the MFCs fed with SA and benzene
were evaluated.
For this purpose, the anode and cathode potentials were measured using
an Arduino, with an Ag/AgCl(sat) (3.0 mol L–1 KCl) reference electrode, for 166 h. The cell voltage was obtained
using eq
 :
 5 E c e l l = E c a t h o d e − E a n o d e The results are shown in Figures S5 and S6 for the SA- and benzene-fed
MFC, respectively. For both the cathode
and anode, the potential was stable, with the voltage varying little
during the period. For the SA-fed MFC, the cathode and anode
had average voltages
of 801 mV and −282 mV vs Ag/AgCl(sat) (3.0 mol L–1 KCl), respectively. For the benzene-fed MFC, the
cathode and anode had average voltages of 860 mV and −289 mV
vs. Ag/AgCl(sat) (3.0 mol L–1 KCl), respectively.
In the SA-fed MFC, the voltage remained practically constant throughout
the monitoring period. The calculated cell voltage (519 mV) was close
to the experimental cell voltage (549 mV), showing that the experimental
and calculated values were in agreement. In the benzene-fed MFC, the
voltage dropped slightly during the first 24 h because the biofilm
was regenerated. Thereafter, the voltage increased significantly,
with the maximum electron flow remaining practically constant. Furthermore,
the calculated cell voltage (584 mV) was close to the experimental
cell voltage (646 mV), showing that the experimental and calculated
values were in agreement. Finally, a comparison of the results
obtained regarding the efficiency
of benzene biodegradation and energy generation of the MFC proposed
in this study was made with other devices in the literature. Table
 compiles some recent
MFC data on benzene treatment. 1 Comparison of Data Obtained by Different
MFCs during Benzene Biodegradation Substrate (mg L–1) Power Density (mW m–2) Current Density (mA m–2) Coulombic Efficiency (%) Remove (%) Ref. Benzene
(15.0) and ammonium (20.0) 316 990 14.0 100.0

 Benzene (50.0) 38 100 - 97.4

 Benzene (10.9) 0.021–0.449 0.66–20.44 0.22–7.59 100.0

 Benzene (25.0) and acetate (1000.0) 320 2350 0.9 100.0

 Benzene
(800.0) and toluene (800.0) 0.67 60 0.11 97.0

 Benzene (330.0) 390.1 2122.7 14.4 98.7 This study The power density achieved by the MFC developed in
this study was
approximately 100 times greater than that reported for similar devices
in the literature. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the MFC generated
a substantial current density (2122.7 mA m–2), indicating
that the biofilm formed in this study was capable of producing significantly
more energy when using both SA and benzene as substrates, while simultaneously
facilitating the removal of these compounds. This finding represents
a significant advancement in the development of technologies for the
treatment of water contaminated with benzene. 3.3. Microbial Community in the Mangrove Sediment
and MFC Bioanode The microbiota composition and diversity
indices were analyzed under three distinct conditions, including the
mangrove sediment (inoculum) and the biofilms acclimated with either
SA or benzene. These analyses provided insights into the microbial
communities formed under different substrate conditions and their
relationship with energy generation. The results are illustrated in Figure
 . 5 Relative abundance of
various taxa at the genus level in the mangrove
sediment and in the biofilms formed in MFCs fed with SA and benzene. Mangrove microbial communities include all types
of microorganisms,
such as algae, fungi, and bacteria. However, sulfate-reducing bacteria
stand out because they form an important group in anaerobic sediments. In the inoculum from mangrove sediment, the
genus Sulfuvorum (31.45%) predominated,
but a significant portion of the microorganisms remained unassigned
(25.17%). Besides Sulfuvorum, other
sulfur-reducing bacteria were detected in inoculum, inclusing Desulfosarcina (1.88%), Clostridium (1.76%), Romboutsia (1.69%), and Desulfobacterium (1.38%), which was expected for
a mangrove sediment. Sulfuvorum is
a facultative anaerobic and mesophilic genus that can oxidize hydrogen
and reduce sulfur, nitrate, and thiosulfate.
,
 The mangrove environment may explain the high abundance of this
genus: its high salinity and low oxygenation favor intermediates of
anaerobic organic matter degradation, such as hydrogen and sulfides.
 The genus Sulfuvorum, the most abundant
genus in the mangrove sediment (inoculum), became less abundant in
the SA- and benzene-fed MFC biofilms (3.15% and 0.68%, respectively),
which can be explained by the low sulfate content in the culture medium.
In the SA-fed MFC biofilm, the predominant genera were Arcobacter (20.23%) and Comamonas (11.03%). A significant portion of the microorganisms remained unassigned
(10.26%), and the genera Proteinclasticum, Pseudomonas, and Desulfuromonas were present at 6.53, 3.88, and 3.18%,
respectively ( Figure
 ). Thus, genera Arcobacter and Comamonas predominated in the biofilm formed in the
MFC supplemented with the preferred substrate of electrogenic microorganisms.
The genus Arcobacter relative abundance
increased from 0.44% in the inoculum to 20.23% in the SA-fed MFC biofilm.
Arcobacter tolerates small amounts
of oxygen and has been reported to be the dominant genus in some MFCs.
,
 On the basis of the increased abundance of a flagellin protein under
anaerobic growth on an insoluble electrode, Arcobacter itself can transfer electrons to an external solid electron acceptor.
,
 Additionally, some Arcobacter species
reduce Mn and Fe,78,79 which indicates that they may be
electrogenic, so the genus Arcobacter certainly participated in energy generation in the MFC. The Comamonas relative abundance increased from 0.1%
in the inoculum to 11.03% in the SA-fed MFC biofilm, suggesting that
the presence of this genus probably depended on SA. Indeed, Lim et
al. correlated the genera present in
MFC biofilms with exoelectrogenic activity and identified seven predominant
genera, including Comamonas. In the benzene-fed MFC biofilm, Bacillus (32.93%) and Arcobacter (30.28%)
predominated, comprising 63.21% of the microbial community. The genera Pelobacter, Desulfurumonas, and Pseudomonas were also identified
at 2.22, 1.64, and 0.87%, respectively ( Figure
 ). Clearly, benzene addition has shifted
the microbial community composition by diminishing Commamonas and enriching the Arcobacter and Bacillus populations. This bacterial
consortium also shaped the MFC performance, as confirmed in the electrochemical
tests and characterizations ( Section
 ). For example, the electrogenic Arcobacter abundance increased from 20.23% to 30.28%,
and the MFC power density increased from 238.8 ± 19 to 390.1
± 26 mW m–2 in the SA- and benzene-fed MFC
biofilm, respectively. The most expressive enrichment is observed
in the genus Bacillus which relative
abundance increases from
0.88 to 3.0% and then to 32.93% in the inoculum, SA-fed MFC biofilm,
and benzene-fed MFC biofilm, respectively. The genus Bacilllus is therefore important for degrading benzene. The Shannon diversity index is the most widespread measure of diversity.
The higher the Shannon index, the greater the diversity. The biofilm
acclimated with SA ( Figure S7 ) showed greater
diversity, with an index of 5.73, followed by the mangrove sediment,
with an index of 5.12, and the biofilm acclimated with benzene, with
an index of 4.97. The lowest value of the Shannon index obtained for
benzene was expected because the toxicity of this compound severely
selects species. Similar results were observed when calculating the
Simpson index ( Figure S8 ), which is another
important indicator that deals with species equitability and whose
values are inversely related to biodiversity.
 In general, river and marine sediments present a great diversity
of exoelectrogenic microorganisms because they contain a large amount
of organic matter and offer favorable anaerobic conditions. However, numerous studies have focused on Shewanella sp. and Geobacter sp., providing limited information about the molecules, structures,
extracellular electron transfer capacity, and electron transfer mechanisms
of exoelectrogenic microorganisms. Given
that the mangrove sediment sample comes from a region in the Southern
Hemisphere, its overall composition differs greatly from anything
previously described in the literature. For example, species belonging
to the genus Pseudomonas sp. are reported
to be promising microorganisms for degrading aromatic compounds and
various substrates. However, in our analysis,
the genus Pseudomonas corresponded
to only 3.88% and 0.87% of the microbial community in the SA- and
benzene-fed MFC, respectively. Therefore, the changes in the microbial
community observed when the substrate was changed suggested that different
metabolic pathways were activated within the same community, which
allowed the MFCs to exhibit distinct electrochemical behavior. Over the past decade, studies have demonstrated that strains capable
of degrading benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes (BTEXs) in
the environment belong to the genus Pseudomonas, for example, Pseudomonas putida and Pseudomonas fluorescens.
,
 On the other hand, Wongbunmak et al. reported a Gram-positive bacterial isolate identified as Bacillus amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum strain
W1 that can degrade all BTEXs. The authors also proposed the degradation
pathway of these compounds by the new strain: benzene was converted
to benzene dihydrodiol by dioxidation and to phenol by monooxidation.
The identified degradation products were pyruvate or acetaldehyde,
which were subsequently incorporated into the TCA cycle. It is worth
noting that the catabolic pathways for BTEX biodegradation have been
well characterized in Gram-negative bacteria but not in Gram-positive
bacteria, especially in the genus Bacillus. Considering that the genus Bacillus predominated in the MFC biofilm fed with benzene, the phylogenetic
diversity of this genus was analyzed ( Figure S9 ). To date, there are no references on Bacillus in an MFC biofilm that specifically degrades benzene and produces
bioelectricity. 3.4. Monitoring Benzene Biodegradation
 Figure
 shows the
benzene biodegradation and cell voltage (A) and the concentration
of the products formed from benzene biodegradation as a function of
time (B). 6 Benzene biodegradation and cell voltage (A) and concentration of
the products formed from benzene biodegradation as a function of time
(B). According to Wongbunmak et al.,
B. amyloliquefaciens W1
degrades benzene through
two main routes: dioxidation to benzene dihydrodiol or monooxidation
to phenol. In this process, the authors identified enzymes such as
benzene 1,2-dioxygenase, toluene dioxygenase, and naphthalene dioxygenase,
as well as reaction intermediates such as benzene dihydrodiol, phenol,
catechol, 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde, cis-muconate,
1,2,3-trihydroxybenzene, cis-2-hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate,
and 4-hydroxy-2-oxovalerate. Benzene biodegradation was monitored
in the MFCs by GC-FID. The
chromatograms ( Figure S10 ) showed that
the benzene peak (t
R = 1.32 min) gradually
decreased, confirming its biodegradation throughout the MFC operation
(96 h). The HPLC-RID chromatogram obtained for the products
( Figure S11 ) revealed the presence of two
compounds:
acetate (t
R = 15.3 min) and butyrate (t
R = 21.7 min). The acetate and butyrate concentrations
increased gradually until 48 h. Thereafter, these products were also
consumed, and their peaks disappeared after 96 h. The products
present in the gaseous fraction were monitored by
GC-TCD after treatment for 96 h. The chromatogram ( Figure S12 ) showed four peaks, corresponding to hydrogen (t
R = 0.90 min), nitrogen (t
R = 1.76 min) (originating from the MFC deaeration process),
methane (t
R = 4.45 min), and carbon dioxide
(t
R = 11.99 min). The percentage
of benzene in the MFC decreased over time to 98.7
± 2.4% after 96 h. Therefore, the microorganisms in the MFC biofilm
biodegraded benzene while generating energy. The observed drop in
product concentration may have been due to its reassimilation by microorganisms
present in the MFC. The CE calculated for MFC was 14.4%. However,
the efficiency of
complex and interconnected processes, such as benzene degradation
in MFC, can also be assessed with the help of the concept of exergy
through the so-called exergy analysis. Exergy analysis is a thermodynamic
tool that allows the assessment of useful effects, resource destruction,
and losses to the environment based on a common basis: the amount
of work available. Conceptually, exergy can be defined as the amount
of work obtained when a fragment of matter is brought to a state of
thermodynamic equilibrium with the common components of its surroundings
through reversible processes.
 An
instantaneous performance metric for the operational efficiency
of the MFC can be defined based on the electrical power supplied by
the fuel cell and the exergy input corresponding to the consumption
of benzene at the anode:
 6 η = δ W e ∂ E x ∂ N b . d N b d t where W

e
 corresponds
to the work delivered by the fuel cell, Ex to the
total exergy of the anode electrolyte, and N
b to the number of benzene moles within the anode electrolyte. One should observe that the instantaneous exergy efficiency is
governed by two main phenomena with a time delay between them: the
denominator, representing the consumption of the benzene by the biofilm,
and the numerator, which represents the subsequent energy release
by the biofilm associated with the electric power yield. Under these
circumstances, the use of a cumulative efficiency would provide better
insight into the MFC operational efficiency:
 7 η = ∫ t = 0 t = t c y c l e δ W e d t ∫ t = 0 t = t c y c l e ∂ E x ∂ N b . d N b d t = W e E x b where W
e
 represents the electrical
work produced by the MFC during one feed cycle, while Ex
b
 corresponds to the exergy received by the biofilm
through benzene biodegradation within this same cycle.
 Figure
 shows the
results obtained for the benzene exergy and electrical energy released
by the cell (A) and the cumulative energy efficiency of the MFC (B). 7 Benzene
exergy and electrical energy released by the cell (A) and
cumulative MFC energy efficiency (B). The red curve in Figure
 A indicates that the exergy value obtained
from the benzene
consumed by the microorganisms present in the biofilm, over 196 h
of treatment, reached a maximum limit of 616.1 J. This value represents
the equivalent, in terms of work (W), of the energy contained in the
“fuel” (benzene) consumed by the biofilm. In contrast,
the black curve shows the electrical energy released by the microbial
fuel cell (MFC), which reached a maximum value of 109.9 J. By
dividing the exergy value of the benzene by the value of the
electrical energy generated by the MFC, the MFC cumulative energy
efficiency was calculated, amounting to 17.8% over 196 h of operation.
This result is quite close to the value found for the Coulombic efficiency
of the MFC (14.4%), confirming that both Coulombic efficiency and
exergy analysis are reliable metrics for expressing MFC performance. However, this cumulative energy efficiency of 17.8% indicates that
approximately one-fifth of the total potential for electrical power
generation was effectively utilized by the MFC. This means that part
of the chemical energy made available by the MFC, through substrate
consumption, was directed toward cell growth. Therefore, the voltage generated by the MFC ( Figure
 A) appears to originate mainly from the faradaic
process associated with benzene consumption and biodegradation promoted
by the microorganisms in the biofilm. Furthermore, the Coulombic
efficiencies (CEs) obtained for MFCs
using benzene alone or in combination with other substrates varied
significantly between studies ( Table
 ). The highest CE value obtained was for the system
proposed in this study (14.4%), surpassing the other configurations
and highlighting the potential of the system for enhanced energy recovery
from highly toxic pollutants. 3.5. Acute Toxicity Tests Initially, tests
on pure Lovley and Phillips medium were performed to verify whether
the medium was toxic to D. similis.
The results ( Table S1 ) showed high toxicity
of the medium, caused by the large amount of salts present. Regarding the tests performed with diluted Lovley and Phillips medium,
the highest dilution that did not show immobility was 3.3% (v/v) ( Table S2 ). Therefore, this concentration was
chosen to evaluate the toxicity of the medium in the presence of benzene
and after treatment in MFC. Subsequently, toxicity in the presence
of benzene at 0.33, 1.1,
3.3, 11.0, and 33.0 mg L–1 was evaluated. The results
obtained ( Table S3 ) showed that benzene
at 11.0 and 33.0 mg L–1 presented acute toxicity
to D. similis, with average mortality
rates of 95.0 and 100.0%, respectively. Finally, toxicity after treatment
in MFC was evaluated. The results obtained ( Table S4 ) showed that the treatment completely removed toxicity and
did not generate any toxic metabolites for D. similis under the conditions tested. 4. Conclusion In this study, an MFC system
was developed using a novel electrogenic
microbial consortium derived from mangrove sediments for the bioremediation
of benzene and the simultaneous generation of energy. The biofilm
formed, composed mainly of the genera Bacillus (32.9%) and Arcobacter (30.3%), exhibited
remarkable adaptation to benzene as a substrate, promoting high conductivity
and electrochemical stability. As a result, the MFC achieved 98.7
± 2.4% benzene removal within 96 h, a maximum voltage of 902.3
± 20.6 mV, a power density of 390.1 ± 26 mW m–2, and a cumulative energy efficiency of 17.8% over 196 h of operationvalues
significantly higher than those reported for similar systems. Furthermore,
toxicity tests demonstrated the complete removal of solution toxicity
after treatment. Despite these promising results, the study
has limitations inherent
to the laboratory scale and batch mode. Future research will focus
on the implementation of continuous and larger-scale reactors, the
evaluation of system performance in real effluents and complex contaminant
mixtures, and the development of strategies to increase energy efficiency,
including electrode engineering. In summary, the results demonstrate
that microbial consortia derived
from mangroves represent a highly promising strategy to integrate
efficient bioremediation of aromatic compounds with bioelectricity
generation, contributing to the advancement of bioelectrochemical
technologies applied to environmental decontamination. Supplementary Material Acknowledgments The authors acknowledge
the São Paulo Research
Foundation (FAPESP – processes 2021/12866-9, 2022/04024-0,
2023/07992-0, and 2024/00725-0) and Prof. Dr. Josimar Ribeiro (Federal
University of Espírito Santo - UFES). AdThe Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.5c05703 . Additional results including graphs, cyclic voltammograms,
electrochemical impedance spectra, chromatograms, phylogenic tree,
and tables ( PDF ) The Article Processing
Charge for the publication of this research was funded by the Coordenacao
de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES), Brazil (ROR
identifier: 00x0ma614). The authors
declare no competing financial interest. Published
as part of ACS Omega
 special issue “Chemistry in Brazil: Advancing through
Open Science”. References Xing H., Husain S., Simionescu M., Ghosh S., Zhao X.. Role of green
innovation technologies and urbanization growth for energy demand:
Contextual evidence from G7 countries. Gondwana
Res. 2024;129:220–238. doi: 10.1016/j.gr.2023.12.014. Wang Q., Guo J., Li R., Jiang X.-T.. Exploring the role of nuclear energy
in the energy transition: A comparative perspective of the effects
of coal, oil, natural gas, renewable energy, and nuclear power on
economic growth and carbon emissions. Environ.
Res. 2023;221:115290. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2023.115290. de
Souza J. C., Silva J. P., Zanoni M. V. B., de
Andrade A. R.. High sensitive phosphorene and molecular imprinted
polymers electrochemical sensor to determine benzene in oilfield-produced
water. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 2024;12(1):111703. doi: 10.1016/j.jece.2023.111703. Yi S., Abbasi K. R., Hussain K., Albaker A., Alvarado R.. Environmental
concerns in the United States: Can renewable energy, fossil fuel energy,
and natural resources depletion help? Gondwana
Res. 2023;117:41–55. doi: 10.1016/j.gr.2022.12.021. Li L., Li H., Zhang X., Wang L., Xu L., Wang X., Yu Y., Zhang Y., Cao G.. Pollution characteristics and health
risk assessment of benzene homologues in ambient air in the northeastern
urban area of Beijing, China. J. Environ. Sci. 2014;26:214–223. doi: 10.1016/S1001-0742(13)60400-3. Golkhorshidi F., Sorooshian A., Jafari A. J., Baghani A. N., Kermani M., Kalantary R. R., Ashournejad Q., Delikhoon M.. On the nature
and health impacts of BTEX in a populated middle eastern city: Tehran,
Iran. Atmos. Pollut. Res. 2019;10:921–930. doi: 10.1016/j.apr.2018.12.020. Wolicka D., Suszek A., Borkowski A., Bielecka A.. Application of aerobic
microorganisms in bioremediation in situ of soil contaminated by petroleum
products. Bioresour. Technol. 2009;100:3221–3227. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2009.02.020. Al-Sabahi J., Bora T., Al-Abri M., Dutta J.. Efficient visible light
photocatalysis of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene (BTEX)
in aqueous solutions using supported zinc oxide nanorods. PLoS One. 2017;12(12):e0189276. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189276. Costa A. S., Romão L. P. C., Araújo B. R., Lucas S. C. O., Maciel S. T. A., Wisniewski Jr A., Alexandre M. R.. Environmental
strategies to remove volatile aromatic fractions (BTEX) from petroleum
industry wastewater using biomass. Bioresour.
Technol. 2012;105:31–39. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2011.11.096. Ekins P., Vanner R., Firebrace J.. Zero emissions of oil in water from
offshore oil and gas installations: economic and environmental implications. J. Cleaner Prod. 2007;15:1302–1315. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2006.07.014.

MacIntosh, D. L.
;
Spengler, J. D.
.
Human exposure assessment; World Health Organization: Geneva, 2000.
International
Agency for Research on Cancer. Some
Industrial Chemicals and Dyestuffs; International
Agency for Research on Cancer: Lyon, 1982. Feng J., Song T., Zhang Y., Wang S., Zhang R., Huang L., Zhang C., Liu P.. Synchronous removal
of gaseous toluene and benzene and degradation process shifts in microbial
fuel cell-biotrickling filter system. Bioresour.
Technol. 2024;400:130650. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2024.130650. Kim H. J., Kim J. H., Jeon Y., Kim S.. Co-substrate-fed microbial
fuel cell for enhanced power generation and removal of groundwater
contaminants. Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 2022;43:1052–1056. doi: 10.1002/bkcs.12582. Halfeld G. G., de Almeida E. J. R., Reginatto V., de Andrade A. R.. Acclimatization
of a microbial consortium into a stable biofilm to produce energy
and 1,3-propanediol from glycerol in a microbial fuel cell. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy. 2022;47(49):21241–21252. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.04.223. de
Almeida E. J. R., Halfeld G. G., Reginatto V., de Andrade A. R.. Simultaneous energy generation, decolorization, and
detoxification of the azo dye Procion Red MX-5B in a microbial fuel
cell. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 2021;9(5):106221. doi: 10.1016/j.jece.2021.106221. Feng Y., Yang Q., Wang X., Liu Y., Lee H., Ren N.. Treatment of biodiesel production wastes with simultaneous
electricity
generation using a single-chamber microbial fuel cell. Bioresour. Technol. 2011;102:411–415. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2010.05.059. Agrahari R., Bayar B., Abubackar H. N., Giri B. S., Rene E. R., Rani R.. Advances in the development
of electrode materials for improving
the reactor kinetics in microbial fuel cells. Chemosphere. 2022;290:133184. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.133184. Guo X., Zhan Y., Chen C., Cai B., Wang Y., Guo S.. Influence of packing material characteristics
on the performance
of microbial fuel cells using petroleum refinery wastewater as fuel. Renew. Energy. 2016;87:437–444. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2015.10.041. Chang S. H., Wu C. H., Wang R. C., Lin C. W.. Electricity
production
and benzene removal from groundwater using low-cost mini tubular microbial
fuel cells in a monitoring well. J. Environ.
Manage. 2017;193:551–557. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.02.053. Wei M., Harnisch F., Vogt C., Ahlheim J., Neu T. R., Richnow H. H.. Harvesting
electricity from benzene and ammonium-contaminated
groundwater using a microbial fuel cell with an aerated cathode. RSC Adv. 2015;5:5321–5330. doi: 10.1039/C4RA12144A. Wu C. H., Lai C. Y., Lin C. W., Kao M. H.. Generation of power
by microbial fuel cell with ferricyanide in biodegradation of benzene. clean-Soil, Air, Water. 2013;41:390–395. doi: 10.1002/clen.201200198. Du F. Z., Xie B. Z., Dong W. B., Jia B. Y., Dong K., Liu H.. Continuous flowing membraneless microbial fuel cells with separated
electrode chambers. Bioresour. Technol. 2011;102:8914–8920. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2011.07.056. Liu J., Feng Y. J., Wang X., Shi X. X., Yang Q., Lee H., Zhang Z., Ren N.. The use of double-sided cloth without
diffusion layers as air-cathode in microbial fuel cells. J. Power Sources. 2011;196:8409–8412. doi: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.06.066. Rabaey K., Butzer S., Brown S., Keller J., Rozendal B. A.. High current
generation coupled to caustic production using a lamellar bioelectrochemical
system. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2010;44:4315–4321. doi: 10.1021/es9037963. Aelterman P., Rabaey K., Pham H. T., Boon N., Verstraete W.. Continuous
electricity generation at high voltages and currents using stacked
microbial fuel cells. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2006;40:3388–3394. doi: 10.1021/es0525511. Ringeisen B. R., Henderson E., Wu P. K., Pietron J., Ray B., Biffinger J. C., Jones-Meehan J. M., Jones-Meehan J. M.. High power
density from a miniature microbial fuel cell using Shewanella
oneidensis DSP10. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2006;40(8):2629–2634. doi: 10.1021/es052254w. Wongbunmak A., Khiawjan S., Suphantharika M., Pongtharangkul T.. BTEX biodegradation
by Bacillus amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum W1
and its proposed BTEX biodegradation pathways. Sci. Rep. 2020;10:17408. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-74570-3. Khodaei K., Nassery H. R., Asadi M. M., Mohammadzadeh H., Mahmoodlu M. G.. BTEX biodegradation in contaminated
groundwater using
a novel strain (Pseudomonas sp. BTEX-30) Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 2017;116:234–242. doi: 10.1016/j.ibiod.2016.11.001. You Y., Shim J., Cho C. H., Ryu M. H., Shea P. J., Kamala-Kannan S., Chae J. C., Oh B. T.. Biodegradation of
BTEX mixture by Pseudomonas putida YNS1 isolated
from oil-contaminated soil. J. Basic Microbiol. 2013;53:469–475. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201200067. Shim H., Hwang B., Lee S., Kong S.. Kinetics of BTEX biodegradation
by a coculture of Pseudomonas putida and Pseudomonas fluorescens under hypoxic conditions. Biodegradation. 2005;16:319–327. doi: 10.1007/s10532-004-1842-6. Dou J., Liu X., Hu Z.. Anaerobic BTEX degradation in soil
bioaugmented with
mixed consortia under nitrate reducing conditions. J. Environ. Sci. 2008;20:585–592. doi: 10.1016/S1001-0742(08)62098-7. Zhou Y., Huang H., Shen D.. Multi-substrate biodegradation
interaction
of 1,4-dioxane and BTEX mixtures by Acinetobacter baumannii DD1. Biodegradation. 2016;27:37–46. doi: 10.1007/s10532-015-9753-2. Zhang T., Bain T. S., Nevin K. P., Barlett M. A., Lovley D. R.. Anaerobic
benzene oxidation by Geobacter species. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2012;78:8304–8310. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02469-12. Wongbunmak A., Khiawjan S., Suphantharika M., Pongtharangkul T.. BTEX and naphthalene-degrading
bacterium Microbacterium esteraromaticum strain SBS1–7
isolated from estuarine sediment. J. Hazard.
Mater. 2017;339:82–90. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2017.06.016. Lee Y., Lee Y., Jeon C. O.. Biodegradation of naphthalene, BTEX, and aliphatic
hydrocarbons by Paraburkholderia aromaticivorans BN5
isolated from petroleum-contaminated soil. Sci.
Rep. 2019;9:1–13. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-36165-x. Benedek T., Szentgyörgyi F., Gergócs V., Menashe O., Gonzalez P. A. F., Probst A. J., Kriszt B., Táncsics A.. Potential
of Variovorax paradoxus isolate BFB1_13 for bioremediation
of BTEX contaminated sites. AMB Express. 2021;11:1–17. doi: 10.1186/s13568-021-01289-3. Shi L., Dong H., Reguera G., Beyenal H., Lu A., Liu J., Yu H.-Q., Fredrickson J. K.. Extracellular electron transfer mechanisms
between microorganisms and minerals. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 2016;14:651–662. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro.2016.93. Duarte-Urbina O. J., Rodríguez-Varela F. J., Fernández-Luqueño F., Vargas-Gutiérrez G., Sánchez-Castro M. E., Escobar-Morales B., Alonso-Lemus I. L.. Bioanodes containing catalysts from
onion waste and Bacillus subtilis for energy generation
from pharmaceutical wastewater in a microbial fuel cell. New J. Chem. 2021;45:12634–12646. doi: 10.1039/D1NJ01726H. Guo H., Xie S., Huang C., Tang S., Geng X., Jia X.. An electricity-generating
bacterium separated from oil sludge microbial fuel cells and its environmental
adaptability. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 2023;30:3697–3706. doi: 10.1007/s11356-022-22467-1. Sakr E. A. E., Khater D. Z., Kheiralla Z. M. H., El-Khatib K. M.. Statistical
optimization of waste molasses-based exopolysaccharides and self-sustainable
bioelectricity production for dual chamber microbial fuel cell by Bacillus piscis
. Microb. Cell Fact. 2023;22:202. doi: 10.1186/s12934-023-02216-w. Sreelekshmy B. R., Basheer R., Shibli S. M. A.. Exploration
of bifurcated electron
transfer mechanism in Bacillus cereus for enhanced power generation
in double-chambered microbial fuel cells. J.
Environ. Chem. Eng. 2022;10:107601. doi: 10.1016/j.jece.2022.107601. Das K., Mukherjee A. K.. Crude petroleum-oil
biodegradation efficiency of Bacillus subtilis and Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains isolated from a petroleum-oil
contaminated soil from North-East
India. Bioresour. Technol. 2007;98:1339–1345. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2006.05.032. Chen H., Simoska O., Lim K., Grattieri M., Yuan M., Dong F., Lee Y. S., Beaver K., Weliwatte S., Gaffney E. M., Minteer S. D.. Fundamentals,
applications,
and future directions of bioelectrocatalysis. Chem. Rev. 2020;120(23):12903–12993. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00472. Hindatu Y., Annuar M. S. M., Gumel A. M.. Mini-review: Anode
modification for
improved performance of microbial fuel cell. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 2017;73:236–248. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2017.01.138. TerAvest M. A., Ajo-Franklin C. M.. Transforming
exoelectrogens for biotechnology using
synthetic biology. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2016;113(4):687–697. doi: 10.1002/bit.25723. Narayanasamy S., Jayaprakash J.. Improved performance
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa catalyzed MFCs with graphite/polyester
composite electrodes doped
with metal ions for azo dye degradation. Chem.
Eng. J. 2018;343:258–269. doi: 10.1016/j.cej.2018.02.123. Fan Z., Sun J., Fan X., Wang Y., Qi S., Jing Y., Song R.-B., Li Z.. Viologen derivative-induced graphene
hybrid biofilms for high-performance microbial fuel cells. Electrochim. Acta. 2024;506:145005. doi: 10.1016/j.electacta.2024.145005. Keating K.. A system of
defined (Sensu stricto) media for daphnid (Cladocera) culture. Water Res. 1985;19:73–78. doi: 10.1016/0043-1354(85)90325-2.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Guidance Document on Aquatic Toxicity Testing of Difficult Substances
and Mixtures; Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development: Paris, 2019.
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development. Test No. 202: daphnia
sp. Acute Immobilisation Test; Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development: Paris, 2004.
Brazilian
National Standards Organization. NBR 12713:
aquatic Ecotoxicology - Acute Toxicity - Test with Daphnia spp (Cladocera,
Crustacea); Brazilian National Standards
Organization, 2022. Beaver K., Dantanarayana A., Zani A. B., Lehto D. L., Minteer S. D.. Nitric
oxide as a signaling molecule for biofilm formation and dispersal
in mediated electron transfer microbial electrochemical systems. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2023;170:045503. doi: 10.1149/1945-7111/acc97e. Sauer K., Stoodley P., Goeres D. M., Hall-Stoodley L., Burmølle M., Stewart P. S., Bjarnsholt T.. The biofilm
life cycle – expanding the conceptual model of biofilm formation. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2022;20:608–620. doi: 10.1038/s41579-022-00767-0. Passos V. F., Marcilio R., Aquino-Neto S., Santana F. B., Dias A. C. F., Andreote F. D., Andrade A. R., Reginatto V.. Hydrogen and
electrical energy co-generation by a cooperative fermentation system
comprising Clostridium and microbial fuel cell inoculated
with port drainage sediment. Bioresour. Technol. 2019;277:94–103. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2019.01.031. Xiao Y., Zhang E., Zhang J., Dai Y., Yang Z., Christensen H. E. M., Ulstrup J., Zhao F.. Extracellular
polymeric
substances are transient media for microbial extracellular electron
transfer. Sci. Adv. 2017;3:e1700623. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1700623.

Scott, K.
;
Yu, E. H.
.
Microbial
Electrochemical and Fuel
cells: fundamentals and Applications; Woodhead, 2016. Logan B. E., Rossi R., Ragab A., Saikaly P. E.. Eletroactive microorganisms
in bioelectrochemical systems. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2019;17:307–319. doi: 10.1038/s41579-019-0173-x. In
Seop C., Moon H., Bretschger O., Jang J.-K., Park H.-I., Nealson K. H., Kim B. H.. Electrochemically active bacteria
(EAB) and mediator-less microbial fuel cell. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2006;16:163–177. Malvankar N. S., Lovley D. R.. Microbial nanowires: A new paradigm for biological
electron transfer and bioelectronics. ChemSuschem. 2012;5:1039–1046. doi: 10.1002/cssc.201100733. Wang F., Gu Y., O’Brien J. P., Yi S. M., Yalcin S. E., Srikanth V., Shen C., Vu D., Ing N. L., Hochbaum A. I., Egelman E. H., Malvankar N. S.. Structure
of microbial nanowires reveals stacked hemes that transport electrons
over micrometers. Cell. 2019;177:361–369. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.03.029. Gorby Y. A., Yanina S., McLean J. S., Rosso K. M., Moyles D., Dohnalkova A., Beveridge T. J., Chang I. S., Kim B. H., Kim K. S., Culley D. E., Reed S. B., Romine M. F., Saffarini D. A., Hill E. A., Shi L., Elias D. A., Kennedy D. W., Pinchuk G., Watanabe K., Ishii S., Logan B., Nealson K. H., Fredrickson J. K.. Electrically
conductive bacterial nanowires produced by Shewanella oneidensis strain MR-1 and other microorganisms. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2006;103:11358–11363. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0604517103. Tan Y., Adhikari R. Y., Malvankar N. S., Ward J. E., Nevin K. P., Woodard T. L., Smith J. A., Snoeyenbos-West O. L., Franks A. E., Tuominen M. T.. et al. The low conductivity
of Geobacter uraniireducens pili suggests a diversity
of extracellular electron transfer mechanisms in the genus Geobacter
. Front. Microbiol. 2016;7:980. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00980. Kumar A., Hsu L.-H.-H., Kavanagh P., Barrière F., Lens P. N. L., Lapinsonnière L., John H. L. V., Schröder U., Jiang X., Leech D.. The ins and
outs of microorganism–electrode electron transfer reactions. Nat. Rev. Chem. 2017;1(3):0024. doi: 10.1038/s41570-017-0024. Marsili E., Baron D. B., Shikhare I. D., Coursolle D., Gralnick J. A., Bond D. R..
Shewanella secretes
flavins that mediate extracellular electron transfer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2008;105:3968–3973. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0710525105. Quéméner E. D.-L., Moscoviz R., Bernet N., Marcus A.. Modeling of interspecies
electron transfer in anaerobic microbial communities. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2021;67:49–57. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2020.12.019. Moscoviz R., Fouchécour F., Santa-Catalina G., Bernet N., Trably E.. Cooperative
growth of Geobacter sulfurreducens and Clostridium
pasteurianum with subsequent metabolic shift in glycerol
fermentation. Sci. Rep. 2017;7:44334. doi: 10.1038/srep44334. Pereira-Medrano A. G., Knighton M., Fowler G. J. S., Ler Z. Y., Pham T. K., Ow S. Y., Free A., Ward B., Wright P. C.. Quantitative
proteomic analysis of the exoelectrogenic bacterium Arcobacter butzleri
ED-1 reveals increased abundance of a flagellin protein under anaerobic
growth on an insoluble electrode. J. Proteomics. 2013;78:197–210. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.09.039. Zani A. C. B., Souza J. C., Furlan J. P. R., Stehlingc E. G., Andrade A. R., Reginatto V.. A conductive
film produced by the
supernatant from Serratia marcescens cultivation
containing prodigiosin increases electricity generation in a microbial
fuel cell. Curr. Res. Biotecnol. 2024;7:100215. doi: 10.1016/j.crbiot.2024.100215. Mancilio L. B. K., Ribeiro G. A., Almeida É. J.
R., Siqueira G. M. V., Rocha R. S., Guazzaroni M. E., Andrade A. R., Reginatto V.. Adding value
to lignocellulosic byproducts by using acetate and p-coumaric acid
as substrate in a microbial fuel cell. Ind.
Crops Prod. 2021;171:113844. doi: 10.1016/j.indcrop.2021.113844.

Mohan, S. V.
;
Srikanth, S.
;
Velvizhi, G.
;
Babu, M.
L.
.
Microbial fuel
cells for sustainable bioenergy generation: Principles and perspective
applications. In Biofuel Technologies.
Gupta, V. K.
;
Tuohy, M. G.
;Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 335–368. Choudhury P., Ray R. N., Bandyopadhyay T. K., Basak B., Muthuraj M., Bhunia B.. Process engineering
for stable power recovery from
dairy wastewater using microbial fuel cell. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy. 2021;46:3171–3182. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.06.152. Souza J. C., Machini W. B. S., Zanoni M. V. B., Oliveira-Brett A. M.. Human hair
keratin direct electrochemistry and in situ interaction with p-toluenediamine and p-aminophenol hair
dye precursors using a keratin electrochemical biosensor. ChemElectrochem. 2020;7:1277–1285. doi: 10.1002/celc.202000151.

Thatoi, H.
;
Mishra, R. R.
;
Behera, B. C.
.
Biotechnological
potentials of halotolerant and halophilic bacteria from mangrove ecosystems. In Biotechnological Utilization Of Mangrove Resources;
Patra, J. K.
;
Mishra, R. R.
;
Thatoi, H.
, Eds.; Elsevier: London, 2020; pp. 413–433. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-819532-1.00020-2. Mino S., Kudo H., Arai T., Sawabe T., Takai K., Nakagawa S.. Sulfurovum aggregans sp. nov., a
hydrogen-oxidizing,
thiosulfate-reducing chemolithoautotroph within the Epsilonproteobacteria
isolated from a deep-sea hydrothermal vent chimney, and an emended
description of the genus Sulfurovum
. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 2014;64:3195–3201. doi: 10.1099/ijs.0.065094-0. Inagaki F., Takai K., Kobayashi H., Nealson K. H., Horikoshi K..
Sulfurimonas
autotrophica gen. nov., sp. nov., a novel sulfur-oxidizing
ϵ-proteobacterium isolated from hydrothermal sediments in the
Mid-Okinawa Trough. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 2003;53:1801–1805. doi: 10.1099/ijs.0.02682-0. Fang Z., Cao X., Li X., Wang H., Li X.. Electrode and azo dye
decolorization performance in microbial-fuel-cell-coupled constructed
wetlands with different electrode size during long-term wastewater
treatment. Bioresour. Technol. 2017;238:450–460. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2017.04.075. Szydlowski L., Lan T. C. T., Shibata N., Goryanin I.. Metabolic engineering
of a novel strain of electrogenic bacterium Arcobacter butzleri to
create a platform for single analyte detection using a microbial fuel
cell. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 2020;139:109564. doi: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2020.109564. Thamdrup B., Rosselló-Mora R., Amann R.. Microbial manganese and sulfate reduction
in black sea shelf sediments. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2000;66:2888–2897. doi: 10.1128/AEM.66.7.2888-2897.2000. Lim C. E., Chew C. L., Pan G. T., Chong S., Arumugasamy S. K., Lim J. W., Al-Kahtani A. A., Ng H. S., Abdurrahman M.. Predicting
microbial fuel cell biofilm communities and power generation from
wastewaters with artificial neural network. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy. 2024;52:1052–1064. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2023.08.290. Mancílio L. B.
K., Ribeiro G. A., Lopes E. M., Kishi L. T., Martins-Santana L., de Siqueira G. M. V., Andrade A. R., Guazzaroni M.-E., Reginatto V.. Unusual microbial community and impact of iron and
sulfate on microbial fuel cell ecology and performance. Curr. Res. Biotecnol. 2020;2:64–73. doi: 10.1016/j.crbiot.2020.04.001.

Gibson, D. T.
;
Subramanian, V.
.
Microbial degradation
of aromatic hydrocarbons. In Microbial Degradation
of Organic Compounds; Marcel Dekker Inc.: Nova York, 1984; pp. 181–252. Khan M. D., Li D., Tabraiz S., Shamurad B., Scott K., Khan M. Z., Yu E. H.. Integrated air cathode microbial fuel cell-aerobic bioreactor set-up
for enhanced bioelectrodegradation of azo dye Acid Blue 29. Sci. Total Environ. 2021;756:143752. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143752. Dias F. P. F., Fernandes I. T., Bueno A. V., Rocha P. A. C., de
Oliveira M. L. M.. Exergy analysis of glycerol steam reforming in a heat
recovery reactor. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy. 2021;46(13):8995–9007. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.12.215. Associated Data Supplementary Materials
