1. Water Environ Res. 2026 Mar;98(3):e70318. doi: 10.1002/wer.70318.

Broad-Spectrum Co-Metabolic Substrates Enhance the Bioremediation of
1,2,3-Trichloropropane in Groundwater by a Non-Dehalogenimonas Consortium.

Kong S(1)(2), Ning Z(1)(3), Chen Z(1), Zhang M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hydrogeology and Environmental Geology, Chinese Academy of
Geological Sciences, Shijiazhuang, China.
(2)School of Resources and Environmental Engineering, Hefei University of
Technology, Hefei, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Groundwater Remediation of Hebei Province & China
Geological Survey, Zhengding, Hebei, China.

1,2,3-Trichloropropane (TCP), a highly mobile chemical byproduct, has severely
exacerbated groundwater environment deterioration. Due to the lack of effective
natural attenuation pathways, TCP typically exhibits a fate of persistent
retention within aquifers. To address this challenge, instead of relying on
limited specific strains, this study focused on exploring broad-spectrum
co-metabolic substrates to enhance the degradation efficiency of a
non-Dehalogenimonas synergistic consortium optimized through long-term directed
domestication. Results indicated that the average degradation rate of the
domesticated consortium increased to 19.06 μmol L-1 d-1, achieving complete
removal within 3.5 days, thereby effectively altering the environmental
persistence of TCP. Microbial community and metagenomic analyses revealed that
this transformation process was driven by a synergistic alliance comprising
Fusibacter, Desulfovibrio, Nitratidesulfovibrio, and Parabacteroides, realized
through a coupled metabolic module of "hydrogen production, cofactor synthesis,
and reductive dechlorination". Crucially, the consortium demonstrated
exceptional broad-spectrum adaptability to various co-metabolic substrates,
where sodium acetate and lactate significantly enhanced the degradation
efficiency. This study confirms that utilizing suitable co-metabolic substrates
can effectively activate the non-Dehalogenimonas consortium to regulate the
migration and fate of pollutants in complex groundwater environments, offering
an efficient bioremediation strategy to arrest groundwater contamination.

© 2026 Water Environment Federation.

DOI: 10.1002/wer.70318
PMID: 41736479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
