1. Microbiome. 2024 Jun 5;12(1):101. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01814-z.

Synthetic community derived from grafted watermelon rhizosphere provides 
protection for ungrafted watermelon against Fusarium oxysporum via microbial 
synergistic effects.

Qiao Y(1), Wang Z(1), Sun H(1), Guo H(1), Song Y(2), Zhang H(1), Ruan Y(1), Xu 
Q(1)(3), Huang Q(1), Shen Q(1), Ling N(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Lab of Organic-Based Fertilizers of China and Jiangsu Provincial Key Lab 
for Solid Organic Waste Utilization, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 
210095, China.
(2)Plant-Microbe Interactions, Department of Biology, Science4Life, Utrecht 
University, Padualaan 8, Utrecht, 3584 CH, the Netherlands.
(3)Centre for Grassland Microbiome, State Key Laboratory of Herbage Improvement 
and Grassland Agro-Ecosystems, College of Pastoral Agriculture Science and 
Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 730020, China.
(4)Key Lab of Organic-Based Fertilizers of China and Jiangsu Provincial Key Lab 
for Solid Organic Waste Utilization, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 
210095, China. nling@njau.edu.cn.
(5)Centre for Grassland Microbiome, State Key Laboratory of Herbage Improvement 
and Grassland Agro-Ecosystems, College of Pastoral Agriculture Science and 
Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 730020, China. nling@njau.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Plant microbiota contributes to plant growth and health, including 
enhancing plant resistance to various diseases. Despite remarkable progress in 
understanding diseases resistance in plants, the precise role of rhizosphere 
microbiota in enhancing watermelon resistance against soil-borne diseases 
remains unclear. Here, we constructed a synthetic community (SynCom) of 16 core 
bacterial strains obtained from the rhizosphere of grafted watermelon plants. We 
further simplified SynCom and investigated the role of bacteria with synergistic 
interactions in promoting plant growth through a simple synthetic community.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that the SynCom significantly enhanced the 
growth and disease resistance of ungrafted watermelon grown in non-sterile soil. 
Furthermore, analysis of the amplicon and metagenome data revealed the pivotal 
role of Pseudomonas in enhancing plant health, as evidenced by a significant 
increase in the relative abundance and biofilm-forming pathways of Pseudomonas 
post-SynCom inoculation. Based on in vitro co-culture experiments and bacterial 
metabolomic analysis, we selected Pseudomonas along with seven other members of 
the SynCom that exhibited synergistic effects with Pseudomonas. It enabled us to 
further refine the initially constructed SynCom into a simplified SynCom 
comprising the eight selected bacterial species. Notably, the plant-promoting 
effects of simplified SynCom were similar to those of the initial SynCom. 
Furthermore, the simplified SynCom protected plants through synergistic effects 
of bacteria.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the SynCom proliferate in the rhizosphere 
and mitigate soil-borne diseases through microbial synergistic interactions, 
highlighting the potential of synergistic effects between microorganisms in 
enhancing plant health. This study provides a novel insight into using the 
functional SynCom as a promising solution for sustainable agriculture. Video 
Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01814-z
PMCID: PMC11151650
PMID: 38840214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.