PMID- 42752228
PMC - PMC13598246
AID - 10.1073/pnas.2607664123 [doi]
DP  - 2026 Sep 17
TI  - Cross-feeding enables robust coexistence between four bacterial species.
JT  - Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America

===== CURATED OPEN-ACCESS EXCERPTS (Europe PMC PMC13598246) =====

Cross-feeding enables robust coexistence between four bacterial species
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2607664123

ABSTRACT

Resource supply is generally considered a dominant driver of microbial diversity.

Here, using a four-species bacterial consortium, we asked whether coexistence can emerge from interactions between species rather than being dictated by the external environment.

Across 31 simple nutrient conditions, including 16 single-resource environments, all four species survived and coexisted over eight growth-and-dilution cycles.

We then chose 28 additional conditions to further probe the boundaries of coexistence by varying resource concentrations, temporal dynamics, nutrient complexity and relief of auxotrophy-driven dependencies, and only observed the extinction of a single species in one of these conditions.

Although the community composition in each environment was largely shaped by species' fitness on the supplied resources, experimental assays and consumer-resource modeling showed that the coexistence was explained by cross-feeding and niche partitioning of metabolic byproducts.

These metabolic interactions were strong enough to sustain coexistence even for species that failed to exhibit significant growth on the supplied resources in monoculture.

INTRODUCTION

Here, we bridge this gap by profiling a synthetic four-species bacterial community across an extensive matrix of resource supply conditions, using selective plating to track individual species abundances across eight orders of magnitude for eight growth-and-dilution cycles.

METHODS

All experiments were conducted with one or more of these four strains previously isolated from and cultivated in metal-working fluids: Agrobacterium tumefaciens MWF001 (At), Comamonas testosteroni MWF001 (Ct), Microbacterium liquefaciens MWF001 (Ml; now classified as M. maritypicum), and Ochrobactrum anthropi MWF001 (Oa; now classified as Brucella anthropi) (27, 32).

These species can be distinguished on selective media and quantified by plating and counting of colony-forming units (CFUs) (33).

Most experiments were conducted in M9 minimal medium with different carbon sources.

Unless otherwise stated, the amount of carbon in each medium was normalized to 90 mM of carbon atoms.

The different M9 minimal media were prepared by mixing 10 mL of autoclaved 10X M9 salts (Sigma-Aldrich, US, M6030-1KG), 1 mL of 50X HMB (35), 5 mL of 10X carbon source stock and 34 mL of MilliQ water.

Finally, all media were pH-adjusted to pH 7.4 (with NaOH/HCl) and sterile-filtered.

For all experiments, strains were streaked from glycerol stocks onto Tryptic Soy Agar (TSA) and incubated at 28 deg C for 2 d. Single colonies were used to inoculate 10 mL Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB) in 50 mL Erlenmeyer flasks and grown overnight. These precultures were then diluted to an OD600 of 0.05 in 20 mL fresh TSB in 100 mL flasks and incubated for 3 h (28 deg C, 200 rpm).

The community assembly experiment was conducted in 32 different M9 minimal media, with 16 single carbon sources, 15 pairs of carbon sources and a no-carbon control environment (Fig. 1).

Washed cultures were combined at equal densities (each species to OD600= 2), vortexed, and used to inoculate all wells of a 96-well plate to an initial OD600= 0.03 (in 200 µL) of each species to start the first growth cycle.

Each transfer of the community assembly was cultivated for 72 h in a plate reader (Biotek, Synergy H1) at 28 °C with continuous shaking (double orbital, 425 cpm).

On each transfer a 1/100 dilution (2 µL) was performed into a freshly made plate.

The abundance of each species at the end of each growth cycle was quantified by counting CFUs on selective media (33).

For the second community assembly experiment, seven single carbon source environments (acetate, glutarate, L-glutamate, L-histidine, inosine, malate, ribose) were repeated exactly as in the first community assembly experiments.

Chemostat experiments were performed using Chi.Bio reactor modules (74) coupled to an Ismatec IPC multichannel peristaltic pump.

The peristaltic pump was programmed to a flow rate of 33 µL min−1, corresponding to a dilution rate of d=0.1 h−1 for a 20 mL working volume, and reactors were maintained at 28 °C.

Five minimal-medium conditions were prepared, each standardized to a total of 90 mM carbon atoms, using ribose, sodium acetate, histidine, or glutaric acid as the sole carbon source, as well as a no-carbon control.

At, Ct, Ml, and Oa were grown as described above.

Prior to inoculation, cultures were adjusted and combined to assemble four-species communities with equal starting abundances and a total initial density of OD600 = 0.03 in each medium condition.

CROSS-FEEDING

Having excluded alternative explanations for the observed coexistence, cross-feeding emerged as the primary stabilizing mechanism.

Our CRM simulates growth, resource depletion, and byproduct accumulation as a function of species' resource affinities, maximum uptake rates, and metabolite release profiles and thus captures both resource competition and cross-feeding (Fig. 3).

We then conducted similar experiments in vitro: We cultivated each of the four species in monoculture to stationary phase on two different carbon sources, malate or mannose (for Ct we used isoleucine instead), to create spent media.

These eight spent media were then used to cultivate the four species in monoculture, with growth compared against no-carbon controls.

DISCUSSION

Our results demonstrate that a synthetic four-species bacterial community can maintain robust coexistence across a vast array of nutrient environments, regardless of external resource complexity.

We rule out several alternative explanations and show that this robust coexistence can be explained by niche partitioning of metabolic byproducts from the cocultivated species.

Given the technical challenges of quantifying resource affinities for cross-fed metabolites in vitro, we utilized our consumer-resource framework to identify more accessible signatures of robust richness.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The strains used in this study are available on request.

All data and code used for simulations and data analyses are available on GitHub (79).

A permanent archive of this repository has been deposited to Zenodo (80).

Reference 80: Sulheim S., et al. , Mitri-lab/coexistence: Cross-feeding enables robust coexistence between four bacterial species. Zenodo. 10.5281/zenodo.20789145. Deposited 31 August 2026.
