1. PLoS Genet. 2014 Apr 17;10(4):e1004283. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004283. 
eCollection 2014 Apr.

A synthetic community approach reveals plant genotypes affecting the 
phyllosphere microbiota.

Bodenhausen N(1), Bortfeld-Miller M(1), Ackermann M(2), Vorholt JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Environmental Sciences, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; 
Department of Environmental Microbiology, Eawag, Dubendorf, Switzerland.

The identity of plant host genetic factors controlling the composition of the 
plant microbiota and the extent to which plant genes affect associated microbial 
populations is currently unknown. Here, we use a candidate gene approach to 
investigate host effects on the phyllosphere community composition and 
abundance. To reduce the environmental factors that might mask genetic factors, 
the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana was used in a gnotobiotic system and 
inoculated with a reduced complexity synthetic bacterial community composed of 
seven strains representing the most abundant phyla in the phyllosphere. From a 
panel of 55 plant mutants with alterations in the surface structure, cell wall, 
defense signaling, secondary metabolism, and pathogen recognition, a small 
number of single host mutations displayed an altered microbiota composition 
and/or abundance. Host alleles that resulted in the strongest perturbation of 
the microbiota relative to the wild-type were lacs2 and pec1. These mutants 
affect cuticle formation and led to changes in community composition and an 
increased bacterial abundance relative to the wild-type plants, suggesting that 
different bacteria can benefit from a modified cuticle to different extents. 
Moreover, we identified ein2, which is involved in ethylene signaling, as a host 
factor modulating the community's composition. Finally, we found that different 
Arabidopsis accessions exhibited different communities, indicating that plant 
host genetic factors shape the associated microbiota, thus harboring significant 
potential for the identification of novel plant factors affecting the microbiota 
of the communities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004283
PMCID: PMC3990490
PMID: 24743269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.