1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Nov 9;7:1795. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01795. eCollection
 2016.

Membrane Complexes of Syntrophomonas wolfei Involved in Syntrophic Butyrate 
Degradation and Hydrogen Formation.

Crable BR(1), Sieber JR(1), Mao X(2), Alvarez-Cohen L(2), Gunsalus R(3), 
Ogorzalek Loo RR(4), Nguyen H(4), McInerney MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Plant Biology, University of Oklahoma, Norman 
OK, USA.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley CA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles CA, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles CA, USA.

Syntrophic butyrate metabolism involves the thermodynamically unfavorable 
production of hydrogen and/or formate from the high potential electron donor, 
butyryl-CoA. Such redox reactions can occur only with energy input by a process 
called reverse electron transfer. Previous studies have demonstrated that 
hydrogen production from butyrate requires the presence of a proton gradient, 
but the biochemical machinery involved has not been clearly elucidated. In this 
study, the gene and enzyme systems involved in reverse electron transfer by 
Syntrophomonas wolfei were investigated using proteomic and gene expression 
approaches. S. wolfei was grown in co-culture with Methanospirillum hungatei or 
Dehalococcoides mccartyi under conditions requiring reverse electron transfer 
and compared to both axenic S. wolfei cultures and co-cultures grown in 
conditions that do not require reverse electron transfer. Blue native gel 
analysis of membranes solubilized from syntrophically grown cells revealed the 
presence of a membrane-bound hydrogenase, Hyd2, which exhibited hydrogenase 
activity during in gel assays. Bands containing a putative iron-sulfur (FeS) 
oxidoreductase were detected in membranes of crotonate-grown and butyrate grown 
S. wolfei cells. The genes for the corresponding hydrogenase subunits, hyd2ABC, 
were differentially expressed at higher levels during syntrophic butyrate growth 
when compared to growth on crotonate. The expression of the FeS oxidoreductase 
gene increased when S. wolfei was grown with M. hungatei. Additional 
membrane-associated proteins detected included FoF1 ATP synthase subunits and 
several membrane transporters that may aid syntrophic growth. Furthermore, 
syntrophic butyrate metabolism can proceed exclusively by interspecies hydrogen 
transfer, as demonstrated by growth with D. mccartyi, which is unable to use 
formate. These results argue for the importance of Hyd2 and FeS oxidoreductase 
in reverse electron transfer during syntrophic butyrate degradation.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01795
PMCID: PMC5101538
PMID: 27881975