1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Jun 15;11(3):e0452822. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.04528-22. 
Epub 2023 May 8.

Synthetic Denitrifying Communities Reveal a Positive and Dynamic 
Biodiversity-Ecosystem Functioning Relationship during Experimental Evolution.

Wu B(1), Guan X(1), Deng T(1), Yang X(1), Li J(2), Zhou M(1), Wang C(1), Wang 
S(1), Yan Q(1), Shu L(1), He Q(3), He Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Microbiomics Research Center, School of Environmental Science 
and Engineering, Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory 
(Zhuhai), Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)College of Agronomy, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, China.
(3)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The University of 
Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee, USA.

Biodiversity is vital for ecosystem functions and services, and many studies 
have reported positive, negative, or neutral biodiversity-ecosystem functioning 
(BEF) relationships in plant and animal systems. However, if the BEF 
relationship exists and how it evolves remains elusive in microbial systems. 
Here, we selected 12 Shewanella denitrifiers to construct synthetic denitrifying 
communities (SDCs) with a richness gradient spanning 1 to 12 species, which were 
subjected to approximately 180 days (with 60 transfers) of experimental 
evolution with generational changes in community functions continuously tracked. 
A significant positive correlation was observed between community richness and 
functions, represented by productivity (biomass) and denitrification rate, 
however, such a positive correlation was transient, only significant in earlier 
days (0 to 60) during the evolution experiment (180 days). Also, we found that 
community functions generally increased throughout the evolution experiment. 
Furthermore, microbial community functions with lower richness exhibited greater 
increases than those with higher richness. Biodiversity effect analysis revealed 
positive BEF relationships largely attributable to complementary effects, which 
were more pronounced in communities with lower richness than those with higher 
richness. This study is one of the first studies that advances our understanding 
of BEF relationships and their evolutionary mechanisms in microbial systems, 
highlighting the crucial role of evolution in predicting the BEF relationship in 
microbial systems. IMPORTANCE Despite the consensus that biodiversity supports 
ecosystem functioning, not all experimental models of macro-organisms support 
this notion with positive, negative, or neutral biodiversity-ecosystem 
functioning (BEF) relationships reported. The fast-growing, metabolically 
versatile, and easy manipulation nature of microbial communities allows us to 
explore well the BEF relationship and further interrogate if the BEF 
relationship remains constant during long-term community evolution. Here, we 
constructed multiple synthetic denitrifying communities (SDCs) by randomly 
selecting species from a candidate pool of 12 Shewanella denitrifiers. These 
SDCs differ in species richness, spanning 1 to 12 species, and were monitored 
continuously for community functional shifts during approximately 180-day 
parallel cultivation. We demonstrated that the BEF relationship was dynamic with 
initially (day 0 to 60) greater productivity and denitrification among SDCs of 
higher richness. However, such pattern was reversed thereafter with greater 
productivity and denitrification increments in lower-richness SDCs, likely due 
to a greater accumulation of beneficial mutations during the experimental 
evolution.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.04528-22
PMCID: PMC10269844
PMID: 37154752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.