1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Jul 5;13:840098. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.840098. 
eCollection 2022.

Cyanobacteria as Candidates to Support Mars Colonization: Growth and 
Biofertilization Potential Using Mars Regolith as a Resource.

Macário IPE(1)(2), Veloso T(1)(2), Frankenbach S(1), Serôdio J(1), Passos H(2), 
Sousa C(3), Gonçalves FJM(1), Ventura SPM(2), Pereira JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Centre for Environmental and Marine Studies, 
University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
(2)CICECO - Aveiro Institute of Materials, Department of Chemistry, University 
of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
(3)Laboratório Associado, Centro de Biotecnologia e Química Fina, Escola 
Superior de Biotecnologia, Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Porto, Portugal.

Cyanobacteria are indicated as organisms that can possibly support Mars 
colonization, contributing to the production of oxygen and other commodities 
therein. In this general context, the aim of this work was to evaluate the 
ability of three species of cyanobacteria (Anabaena cylindrica, Nostoc muscorum, 
and Arthrospira platensis) and a green microalga (Chlorella vulgaris) to grow 
using only the resources existing in Mars, i.e., water and Martian regolith 
stimulant (MGS-1), under an Earth-like atmosphere. A Martian regolith extract 
was produced and used as a culture medium to grow these species. Their growth 
was assessed during a period of 25 days, using optical density and fluorometric 
parameters. After this period, the possible contribution of end-of-life 
cyanobacteria/microalga as biofertilizing agents was also assessed, using the 
macrophyte Lemna minor as a vegetable model. Among the three species, N. 
muscorum showed the best growth performance when compared to the other species, 
while A. platensis and C. vulgaris were not able to thrive on Mars regolith 
extract. Therefore, N. muscorum should be the target of future studies not only 
due to their role in oxygen production but also due to their possible use as a 
food source, as many members of the Nostoc genus. Cyanobacteria and microalgae 
(A. platensis and C. vulgaris) showed good abilities as biofertilizing agents, 
i.e., they stimulated biomass (i.e., dry weight) production at levels comparable 
to the plants that grew on standard synthetic medium. The highest yield was 
reached with A. platensis, while the lowest was achieved using the media with N. 
muscorum. FTIR-ATR (Fourier transform infrared with attenuated total 
reflectance) spectroscopy showed that the differences between the plants grown 
on media with or without Martian regolith seem to be related mainly to 
polysaccharides.

Copyright © 2022 Macário, Veloso, Frankenbach, Serôdio, Passos, Sousa, 
Gonçalves, Ventura and Pereira.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.840098
PMCID: PMC9295076
PMID: 35865930

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.