1. Nat Ecol Evol. 2023 Jan;7(1):143-154. doi: 10.1038/s41559-022-01923-8. Epub
2023  Jan 2.

Mutualism-enhancing mutations dominate early adaptation in a two-species 
microbial community.

Venkataram S(1), Kuo HY(1)(2), Hom EFY(3), Kryazhimskiy S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Behavior and Evolution, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Physics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Biology and Center for Biodiversity and Conservation Research, 
University of Mississippi, University, MS, USA.
(4)Department of Ecology, Behavior and Evolution, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. skryazhi@ucsd.edu.

Species interactions drive evolution while evolution shapes these interactions. 
The resulting eco-evolutionary dynamics and their repeatability depend on how 
adaptive mutations available to community members affect fitness and 
ecologically relevant traits. However, the diversity of adaptive mutations is 
not well characterized, and we do not know how this diversity is affected by the 
ecological milieu. Here we use barcode lineage tracking to address this question 
in a community of yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and alga Chlamydomonas 
reinhardtii that have a net commensal relationship that results from a balance 
between competitive and mutualistic interactions. We find that yeast has access 
to many adaptive mutations with diverse ecological consequences, in particular 
those that increase and reduce the yields of both species. The presence of the 
alga does not change which mutations are adaptive in yeast (that is, there is no 
fitness trade-off for yeast between growing alone or with alga), but rather 
shifts selection to favour yeast mutants that increase the yields of both 
species and make the mutualism stronger. Thus, in the presence of the alga, 
adaptative mutations contending for fixation in yeast are more likely to enhance 
the mutualism, even though cooperativity is not directly favoured by natural 
selection in our system. Our results demonstrate that ecological interactions 
not only alter the trajectory of evolution but also dictate its repeatability; 
in particular, weak mutualisms can repeatably evolve to become stronger.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41559-022-01923-8
PMID: 36593292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]