1. mSystems. 2017 Nov 14;2(6):e00129-17. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00129-17. 
eCollection 2017 Nov-Dec.

A Synthetic Community System for Probing Microbial Interactions Driven by 
Exometabolites.

Chodkowski JL(1), Shade A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Plant, Soil and Microbial Sciences, Program in Ecology, 
Evolutionary Biology, and Behavior, The DOE Great Lakes Bioenergy Center, and 
The Plant Resilience Institute, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
Michigan, USA.

Though most microorganisms live within a community, we have modest knowledge 
about microbial interactions and their implications for community properties and 
ecosystem functions. To advance understanding of microbial interactions, we 
describe a straightforward synthetic community system that can be used to 
interrogate exometabolite interactions among microorganisms. The filter plate 
system (also known as the Transwell system) physically separates microbial 
populations, but allows for chemical interactions via a shared medium reservoir. 
Exometabolites, including small molecules, extracellular enzymes, and 
antibiotics, are assayed from the reservoir using sensitive mass spectrometry. 
Community member outcomes, such as growth, productivity, and gene regulation, 
can be determined using flow cytometry, biomass measurements, and transcript 
analyses, respectively. The synthetic community design allows for determination 
of the consequences of microbiome diversity for emergent community properties 
and for functional changes over time or after perturbation. Because it is 
versatile, scalable, and accessible, this synthetic community system has the 
potential to practically advance knowledge of microbial interactions that occur 
within both natural and artificial communities. IMPORTANCE Understanding 
microbial interactions is a fundamental objective in microbiology and ecology. 
The synthetic community system described here can set into motion a range of 
research to investigate how the diversity of a microbiome and interactions among 
its members impact its function, where function can be measured as 
exometabolites. The system allows for community exometabolite profiling to be 
coupled with genome mining, transcript analysis, and measurements of member 
productivity and population size. It can also facilitate discovery of natural 
products that are only produced within microbial consortia. Thus, this synthetic 
community system has utility to address fundamental questions about a diversity 
of possible microbial interactions that occur in both natural and engineered 
ecosystems.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00129-17
PMCID: PMC5686522
PMID: 29152587