1. ILAR J. 2015;56(2):169-78. doi: 10.1093/ilar/ilv012.

The Altered Schaedler Flora: Continued Applications of a Defined Murine 
Microbial Community.

Wymore Brand M(1), Wannemuehler MJ(1), Phillips GJ(1), Proctor A(1), Overstreet 
AM(1), Jergens AE(1), Orcutt RP(1), Fox JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Meghan Wymore Brand, DVM, is a graduate student in the Department of 
Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine at the College of Veterinary 
Medicine at Iowa State University in Ames, Iowa. Michael J. Wannemuehler, MS, 
PhD, is Professor and Chair in the Department of Veterinary Microbiology and 
Preventive Medicine at the College of Veterinary Medicine at Iowa State 
University in Ames, Iowa. Gregory J. Phillips, MA, PhD, is a professor in the 
Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine at the College of 
Veterinary Medicine at Iowa State University in Ames, Iowa. Alexandra Proctor is 
a graduate student in the Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive 
Medicine at the College of Veterinary Medicine at Iowa State University in Ames, 
Iowa. Anne-Marie Overstreet, PhD, is a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology at Indiana University School of Medicine-South Bend 
in South Bend, Indiana. Albert E. Jergens, DVM, MS, PhD, is Professor and 
Associate Chair for Research and Graduate Studies in the Department of 
Veterinary Clinical Sciences at the College of Veterinary Medicine at Iowa State 
University in Ames, Iowa. Roger P. Orcutt, PhD, is a consultant at Biomedical 
Research Associates in Dunkirk, New York. James G. Fox, MS, DVM, is Director of 
the Division of Comparative Medicine and Professor in the Department of 
Biological Engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts.

The gastrointestinal (GI) microbiota forms a mutualistic relationship with the 
host through complex and dynamic interactions. Because of the complexity and 
interindividual variation of the GI microbiota, investigating how members of the 
microbiota interact with each other, as well as with the host, is daunting. The 
altered Schaedler flora (ASF) is a model community of eight microorganisms that 
was developed by R.P. Orcutt and has been in use since the late 1970s. The eight 
microorganisms composing the ASF were all derived from mice, can be cultured in 
vitro, and are stably passed through multiple generations (at least 15 years or 
more by the authors) in gnotobiotic mice continually bred in isolator 
facilities. With the limitations associated with conventional, mono- or 
biassociated, and germfree mice, use of mice colonized with a consortium of 
known bacteria that naturally inhabit the murine gut offers a powerful system to 
investigate mechanisms governing host-microbiota relationships, and how members 
of the GI microbiota interact with one another. The ASF community offers 
significant advantages to study homeostatic as well as disease-related 
interactions by taking advantage of a well-defined, limited community of 
microorganisms. For example, quantification and spatial distribution of 
individual members, microbial genetic manipulation, genomic-scale analysis, and 
identification of microorganism-specific host immune responses are all 
achievable using the ASF model. This review compiles highlights associated with 
the 37-year history of the ASF, including descriptions of its continued use in 
biomedical research to elucidate the complexities of host-microbiome 
interactions in health and disease.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Institute for Laboratory Animal Research. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ilar/ilv012
PMCID: PMC4554250
PMID: 26323627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

===== OPEN-ACCESS FULL TEXT (local file asf-ilv012.pdf) =====

The Altered Schaedler Flora: Continued Applications
of a De ﬁned Murine Microbial Community
Meghan Wymore Brand, Michael J. Wannemuehler, Gregory J. Phillips,
Alexandra Proctor, Anne-Marie Overstreet, Albert E. Jergens, Roger P. Orcutt,
and James G. Fox
Meghan Wymore Brand, DVM, is a graduate student in the Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive
Medicine at the College of Veterinary Medicine at Iowa State University in Ames, Iowa. Michael J. Wannemuehler,
MS, PhD, is Professor and Chair in the Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine at the
College of Veterinary Medicine at Iowa State University in Ames, Iowa. Gregory J. Phillips, MA, PhD, is a professor
in the Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine at the College of Veterinary Medicine at
Iowa State University in Ames, Iowa. Alexandra Proctor is a graduate student in the Department of Veterinary
Microbiology and Preventive Medicine at the College of Veterinary Medicine at Iowa State University in Ames,
Iowa. Anne-Marie Overstreet, PhD, is a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Microbiology and Immunology at
Indiana University School of Medicine –South Bend in South Bend, Indiana. Albert E. Jergens, DVM, MS, PhD, is
Professor and Associate Chair for Research and Graduate Studies in the Department of Veterinary Clinical
Sciences at the College of Veterinary Medicine at Iowa State University in Ames, Iowa. Roger P. Orcutt, PhD, is a
consultant at Biomedical Research Associates in Dunkirk, New York. James G. Fox, MS, DVM, is Director of the
Division of Comparative Medicine and Professor in the Department of Biological Engineering at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Michael J. Wannemuehler, Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, Colle ge of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011 or email mjwannem@iastatae.edu.
Abstract
The gastrointestinal (GI) microbiota forms a mutualistic relationship with the host through complex and dynamic interactions.
Because of the complexity and interindividual variation of the GI microbiota, investigating how members of the microbiota
interact with each other, as well as with the host, is daunting. The altered Schaedler ﬂora (ASF) is a model community of eight
microorganisms that was developed by R.P. Orcutt and has been in use since the late 1970s. The eight microorganisms
composing the ASF were all derived from mice, can be cultured in vitro, and are stably passed through multiple generations (at
least 15 years or more by the authors) in gnotobiotic mice continually bred in isolator facilities. With the limitations associated
with conventional, mono- or biassociated, and germfree mice, use of mice colonized with a consortium of known bacteria that
naturally inhabit the murine gut offers a powerful system to investigate mechanisms governing host–microbiota relationships,
and how members of the GI microbiota interact with one another. The ASF community offers signi ﬁcant advantages to study
homeostatic as well as disease-related interactions by taking advantage of a well-de ﬁned, limited community of
microorganisms. For example, quantiﬁcation and spatial distribution of individual members, microbial genetic manipulation,
genomic-scale analysis, and identi ﬁcation of microorganism-speciﬁc host immune responses are all achievable using the ASF
© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Institute for Laboratory Animal Research.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
ILAR Journal, 2015, Vol. 56, No. 2, 169 –178
doi: 10.1093/ilar/ilv012
Article
169
model. This review compiles highlights associated with the 37-year history of the ASF, including descriptions of its continued
use in biomedical research to elucidate the complexities of host-microbiome interactions in health and disease.
Key words: ASF; gnotobiotic; microbiota
The Gut Microbiota
It is well established that the number of bacteria living in our gas-
trointestinal (GI) tract outnumber our own cells 10 to 1, with val-
ues that reach 10 11 cells/gram contents in the colon ( Eckburg
et al. 2005 ; Luckey 1972; Savage 1977 ; Whitman et al. 1998 ). The
mutualistic relationship with the host has co-evolved to form a
dynamic interaction between the gut microbiota and the host.
In healthy individuals, the microbiota thrives in a largely stable
environment with continuous nutrient delivery, and in which
the host bene ﬁts from microbial contributions to metabolism,
vitamin production, immune system development, and com-
petitive exclusion of pathogens ( Ley et al. 2006 ; O’Hara and
Shanahan 2006 ).
Determining how speci ﬁc autochthonous microorganisms
contribute to the health of the mammalian host remains a signif-
icant challenge due to the vast diversity of microbial species in
the gut, which is colonized with several hundred species and
subspecies (Eckburg et al. 2005; Savage 1977). Members of the mi-
crobiota are also not evenly distributed throughout the GI tract,
but are concentrated in many niches throughout the alimentary
tract from the lumen to the mucosa ( Dubos et al. 1965 ; Eckburg
et al. 2005 ; Savage et al. 1968 ; Zoetendal et al. 2002 ). Understand-
ing how microorganisms have adapted to colonize speci ﬁc
niches is also challenging due to the varying environmental
conditions that can be encountered throughout the GI tract,
including pH, nutrient availability, host immunity, and bacterial
cell density.
Mice as Models for the Gut Microbiota
Mice are the most common mammalian model with which to ex-
amine the mutualistic relationship between the host and the mi-
crobial world living within us. Similar to humans, mice have a
complex gut microbiota dominated by Firmicutes and Bacteroi-
detes, along with members of the Proteobacteria, as well as
other phyla that respond to perturbations such as diet and anti-
biotics (Dethlefsen et al. 2007 ; Ley et al. 2006). The murine micro-
biota can be manipulated in ways not possible with humans,
including generation of gnotobiotic mice encompassing both
germfree and deﬁned microbiota mice. In addition to their overall
complexity, conventionally reared mice have been demonstrated
to have a variable microbiota between individuals, as well as sig-
niﬁcant cage-to-cage variation (McCafferty et al. 2013). Differenc-
es in the GI microbiota within the same strain or stock of mouse
obtained from different vendors have been shown to in ﬂuence
research results; for example, the presence or absence of seg-
mented ﬁlamentous bacteria have been shown to in ﬂuence the
development of Th17 cells ( Ivanov et al. 2008 ). Additional exam-
ples demonstrating the in ﬂuence of the microbiota on host re-
sponses have been reported. As reviewed recently by Schoeb
and Bullard (2012) , for example, phenotypic variation in murine
inﬂammatory bowel disease models is a consequence of the dif-
ferences in the microbiota.
Although this diversity in the GI microbiota makes commer-
cially available mice similar to the humans who also have a var-
iable GI microbiota between individuals, microbial diversity
makes it difﬁcult to draw conclusions between studies regarding
how changes in the microbiota affect the host when the study
subjects do not have a uniform microbiota as a point of reference.
Thus, deﬁned microbiota models offer the advantage of a known
and consistent standard upon which to determine how manipu-
lation of GI microorganisms affect physiological processes in the
host.
Gnotobiotics and, more speci ﬁcally, the generation of germ-
free mice, have provided the basis to allow investigators the
ability to study host–microbe as well as microbe–microbe interac-
tions following the purposeful introduction of selected microor-
ganisms or microbial communities. Germfree animals, however,
are not representative of a normal host because they have an
underdeveloped mucosal and systemic immune systems charac-
terized by reduced serum leukocytes and antibody ( Bauer et al.
1963; Horowitz et al. 1964; Thompson and Trexler 1971). Germfree
mice also display anatomical alterations (Figure 1)( i . e . ,a n
enlarged cecum), along with histological, physiological, and met-
abolic differences ( Lesher et al. 1964 ; Thompson and Trexler
1971). Again, it should be realized that mono- or biassociated
models lack the community dynamics of a complex microbiota,
and the resultant host – microbial interactions would not be
representative of those interactions that naturally occur in the
conventional mammalian gut.
Germfree mice have also been used to develop de ﬁned micro-
biota models by colonizing them with a limited number of bacte-
rial species isolated from humans. These “humanized ” mice,
however, have been utilized mainly for short-term biomedical
research studies. In this regard, it is unclear how bacteria from
a human source would adapt during long-term colonization
and vertical transmission in murine hosts in order to maintain
genetic and numerical stability, or organizational structure
(Faith et al. 2013 ; Turnbaugh et al. 2009 ).
Given the limitations of conventional, germfree, or highly
contrived de ﬁned-community mouse models, use of mice with
a consortium of known bacteria that normally inhabit the murine
GI tract offers a powerful system to understand how expression of
speciﬁc genes within the microbiome affect the host, as well as to
determine how members of the GI microbial community interact
Figure 1. Morphological features of the ceca from gnotobiotic and conventional
mice. Left panel: Representative images of the cecum excised from a germfree
(left), a monoassociated (center), or a conventional (right) C3H/HeN mouse.
Right panel: Representative images of the cecum excised from an ASF (left) or
conventional (right) C3H/HeN mouse.
170 | Wymore Brand et al.
with one another. The altered Schaedler ﬂora (ASF) represents a
gnotobiotic mouse model that has been in use for decades (Table1)
and that offers signi ﬁcant advantages to study microbiome –host
interactions.
Development of the ASF
In 1965, Russell W. Schaedler developed a de ﬁned microbiota
mouse colony in which the mice were colonized with two Lacto-
bacillus spp., an anaerobic Streptococcus sp. (Group N), a strain of
bacteroides, an Enterococcus sp., and a coliform strain, all of
which were isolated from Nelson Collins Swiss mice ( Schaedler
et al. 1965 ). The microbial population was maintained from
dam to offspring, and the GI tissue of the mice resembled that
of a mouse with conventional microbiota, but not that of a germ-
free mouse (Figure 1)( Schaedler et al. 1965 ). The bacteria com-
prising this de ﬁned microbial community (Schaedler ﬂora) were
supplied to animal vendors for use as a base microbiota for newly
derived germfree rodents as a means to p rovide a competitive
niche to limit or prevent colonization of GI opportunistic bacterial
pathogens (Trexler and Orcutt 1999). A limitation of the Schaedler
ﬂora, however, was the presence of facultative anaerobes (specif-
ically, Escherichia coli and Streptococcus fecalis ) that typically out-
grew isolator contaminants when cultured aerobically ( Baker
1966).
In 1978, at the behest of the National Cancer Institute, Roger
P. Orcutt, whose PhD mentor was Russell W. Schaedler, devel-
oped a re ﬁn e dm i c r o b i o t ab a s e do nt h eS c h a e d l e rﬂora to be
used by contract suppliers ( Orcutt et al. 1987 ; Trexler and Orcutt
1999). He replaced four of the original bacterial species from the
Schaedler ﬂora with microorganisms isolated from CD-1 mice
(Trexler and Orcutt 1999 ). The new organisms represented
major constituents of the autotchotonous microbiota of the
mouse, as opposed to the original Schaedler facultative anaer-
obes which only reach signi ﬁcant levels in infant mice during
their second week of life before the extremely oxygen-sensitive
(EOS) anaerobes arrive as the mice start to ingest solid food on
day 11 after birth. Three of the newly introduced bacterial species
were EOS anaerobes, selected for morphological differences and
ease of identi ﬁcation with direct phase microscopy of cecal con-
tents or a fecal smear (Trexler and Orcutt 1999). The ﬁnal addition
was a spiral-shaped microorganism (i.e., ASF 457) that was origi-
nally isolated by Dr. Schaedler, using differential ﬁltration
through a 0.45 μm millipore ﬁlter. This species was later named
Mucispirillum schaedleri in his honor ( Robertson et al. 2005 ).
The new microbial community derived by Dr. Orcutt (Table 1)
consisted of eight anaerobic bacteria of which only the two lacto-
bacilli could grow aerobically, allowing for detection of contami-
nation under aerobic growth conditions. This was not possible in
the original Schaedler ﬂora formulation due to the presence of
bacterial species that would replicate aerobically. The ASF mem-
bers do not have cocci or spore-forming blunt-ended rods, which
are the predominant contaminants in gnotobiotic isolators
(Baker 1966 ). The ASF establish stable GI colonization in the
mouse, although ASF 360 ( Lactobacillus intestinalis) may disappear
depending on the mouse ’sd i e t .T h ei m p a c to ft h ed i e to nt h e
microbiota was noted in the 1960s when Dubos and Schaedler
observed that ASF 360 was unable to be cultured when NCS
mice bearing the Schaedler ﬂora were fed a 15% casein diet
(Dubos and Schaedler 1962 ; Dubos et al. 1965 ).
This new ASF microbiota was utilized by major vendors of
commercial mice and rats (e.g., Charles River Laboratories, Harlan
Laboratories, Simonsen Laboratories, and Taconic Biosciences) as
all had contracts with the National Cancer Institute. The new set of
eight microorganisms (i.e., the ASF) eliminated the problems that
were voiced by these NCI supplies that were associated with the
original Schaedler“cocktails” (Trexler and Orcutt 1999). Many ven-
dors including Taconic Biosciences and Charles River Laboratories
continue to use the ASF in their isolator foundation breeding
colonies to provide a baseline microbiota prior to introduction
into barrier production.
The ASF community is representative of a normal murine GI
microbiota that can be stably maintained for generations under
gnotobiotic conditions ( Alexander et al. 2006 ; Sarma-Rupavtarm
et al. 2004 ; Stehr et al. 2009 ). The ASF longitudinally distribute
through the GI tract and differentially occupy niches similar to
a complex GI microbiota; and ASF-colonized mice are healthy,
with a normal immune system and GI function ( Orcutt et al.
1987; Sarma-Rupavtarm et al. 2004 ). Each microorganism can
be individually evalua ted, as organism-speci ﬁcp o l y m e r a s e
chain reaction (PCR) primers have now been developed and
used in research studies ( Alexander et al. 2006 ; Sarma-Rupav-
tarm et al. 2004 ). Each of the ASF can be individually cultivated
in vitro, allowing the production of bacterial antigen that can
be used to evaluate organism-speci ﬁc immune responses, and
offer the opportunity for genetic manipulation of the individual
ASF species ( Jergens et al. 2007 ). Thus, this model is relevant to
investigate speci ﬁc members of the bacterial community, as
well as the impact of the ASF on the host immune system.
Phylogeny of the ASF
In 1999, the 16S rRNA genes of the ASF were sequenced, providing
new phylogenetic information about each of the ASF members
(Dewhirst et al. 1999). From this, ASF 361 was found to be identical
to the type strains of both L. murinus and L. animalis, while ASF 360
was determined to be a novel Lactobacillus similar to L. acidophilus
and L. lactis (Dewhirst et al. 1999). ASF 519 was most closely relat-
ed to Porphyromonas and aligned with an unnamed genus, while
ASF 457 was determined to be in a distinct phylum ( Dewhirst
et al. 1999 ). The remaining four ASF members comprised a
group of gram-positive bacteria possessing a low G/C content
(Dewhirst et al. 1999 ). ASF 492 was identical to Eubacterium plexi-
caudatum, and ASF 500 was not closely related to any other micro-
organism known at the time ( Dewhirst et al. 1999 ). With the
availability of additional DNA sequence-based taxonomic infor-
mation, ASF 519 was recently identiﬁed as Parabacteroides goldstei-
nii, ASF 360 as Lactobacillus intestinalis, and ASF 500 has been more
speciﬁcally identi ﬁed as a species of Pseudoﬂavonifractor within
the order Clostridiales (Duca et al. 2014 ; Momose et al. 2011 ; Park
and Itoh 2005 ). Also, ASF 457 is now classi ﬁed as a novel
bacterium, Mucispirillum schaedleri, in the phylum Deferribacteres
(Robertson et al. 2005), while whole-genome sequencing enabled
further classiﬁcation of ASF 502 as aClostridiumsp. (Wannemuehler
et al. 2014).
Near complete genome sequences of each of the ASF mem-
bers have recently been reported (Table 1), revealing the genetic
composition of an entire gut microbiome ( Wannemuehler et al.
2014). This resource will provide unprecedented opportunities
to understand how gene expression and metabolic activity
respond to changes to the mammalian host. For example, tran-
scriptome analysis of the ASF bacteria can be used to interrogate
how the GI community responds to changes in diet, genetic back-
ground, or pathogenic bacterial infection. In addition, ongoing
work in the authors ’ laboratories includes resequencing the
ASF genomes in an effort to identify heritable genetic alterations
within the ASF in response to changes (e.g., diet, in ﬂammation,
additional microbes) to the host ’s GI microenvironment.
ILAR Journal, 2015, Vol. 56, No. 2 | 171
Table 1. Metadata characterizing the eight members of the altered Schaedler ﬂora (ASF)
ASF 356a ASF 360a ASF 361a ASF 457 ASF 492 ASF 500 ASF 502 ASF 519 a
Mouse strainb Nelson Collins Swiss
(NCS)
NCS NCS NCS CD-1 CD-1 CD-1 NCS
Date of isolation Early 1960s Early 1960s Early 1960s Early 1960s Early 1970s Early 1970s Early 1970s Early 1960s
Geographic
location
Rockefeller
University
Rockefeller
University
Rockefeller
University
Rockefeller
University
Charles River
Laboratories
Charles River
Laboratories
Charles River
Laboratories
Rockefeller
University
Scientist Russell Schaedler Russell Schaedler Russell Schaedler Russell Schaedler Roger Orcutt Roger Orcutt Roger Orcutt Russell Schaedler
Source Intestine/Cecum Stomach Stomach Intestine/Cecum Intestine/cecum Intestine/cecum Intestine/Cecum Intestine/Cecum
Taxonomy Clostridium species Lactobacillus
intestinalis
Lactobacillus
murinus
Mucispirillum
schaedleri
Eubacterium
plexicaudatum
Pseudoﬂavonifactor
species
Clostridium species Parabacteroides
goldsteinii
Genome size
(Mb)
2.91 2.01 2.17 2.33 6.51 3.70 6.48 6.87
GenBank
Accession No.
AQFQ00000000.1 AQFR00000000.1 AQFs00000000.1 AYGZ00000000.1 AQFT00000000.1 AYJP00000000.1 AQFU00000000.1 AQFV00000000.1
Cellular
morphology
aMembers of the original Schaedler ﬂora.
bMouse strain from which the organism was isolated.
172 | Wymore Brand et al.
In Vivo Evaluation of the ASF
Quantitative, real-time PCR (qPCR) has been developed to moni-
tor the absolute abundance of each ASF member ( Sarma-
Rupavtarm et al. 2004 ). For example, Sarma-Rupavtarm and
colleagues evaluated the distribution of the ASF in the GI tract
of 6-week-old C.B-17 SCID mice and noted that P. goldsteinii (ASF
519) was the dominant microorganism, with Clostridium sp. (ASF
502), Mucispirillum sp. (ASF 457), and Lactobacillus sp. (ASF 361) as
the next most prevalent organisms ( Sarma-Rupavtarm et al.
2004). An independent study also revealed ASF 519 as the
dominant organism, and ASF 519 and 502 have previously been
reported to be the dominant organisms from fecal samples
(Geuking et al. 2011; Sarma-Rupavtarm et al. 2004). More recently,
use of 16S rRNA gene sequencing on the Illumina platform con-
ﬁrms the taxonomic distributions identi ﬁed in previous studies
(Figure 2). Also, consistent with previous studies, ASF 360 is too
low in abundance to routinely be detected by 16S sequencing
but is detectable with organism-speci ﬁc PCR from stomach con-
t e n t s .T h i sh i g ht h r o u g h p u ta p p r o a c hf a c i l i t a t e sa n a l y s i so fa
larger number of samples than is feasible using qPCR and, thus,
will be useful to study changes in the microbiota during longitu-
dinal studies in great detail.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can be used to mon-
itor changes in bacterial mucosal association. Using a colony of
gnotobiotic ASF-colonized C3H/HeN mice continuously main-
tained for 14 years, the Wannemuehler laboratory at Iowa State
University has utilized FISH to evaluate spatial distribution of
the ASF following the colonization of E. coli (Figure 3). Mucispiril-
lum schaedleri (ASF 457) has been demonstrated to be a mucous
colonizer in the mouse GI tract and also translocates to the
liver (Robertson et al. 2005); the fusiform ASF organisms are likely
to be differentially associated with the mucous layer of the GI
tract as previously suggested ( Savage et al. 1971 ).
Several studies have evaluated the ASF in multiple genetic
backgrounds of mice, revealing that GI colonization dynamics
are in ﬂuenced by host genetic background, sex, and age of the
mice, though the community structure largely remains stable
over time (Alexander et al. 2006; Ge et al. 2006; Sarma-Rupavtarm
et al. 2004 ; Stehr et al. 2009 ). Longitudinal evaluation demon-
strates that oxygen availability affects colonization dynamics,
with aerotolerant Lactobacillus (ASF 361) dominating in the
upper GI tract, stomach, and esophagus, and obligate anaerobes
more heavily colonizing the cecum and colon ( Alexander et al.
2006; Sarma-Rupavtarm et al. 2004 ). ASF 360 ( Lactobacillus ) was
detected in very low numbers ( Alexander et al. 2006 ; Sarma-
Rupavtarm et al. 2004 ) in the proximal alimentary tract (i.e.,
esophagus). Also, fecal samples were not necessarily equivalent
to samples isolated from within different compartments of the
gastrointestinal tract ( Alexander et al. 2006 ; Sarma-Rupavtarm
et al. 2004 ).
When gnotobiotic ASF mice are conventionalized, the ASF re-
main stable components of the complex microbial community
(Alexander et al. 2006; Stehr et al. 2009 ). Conversely, colonization
of gnotobiotic ASF mice with H. hepaticus has revealed quantita-
tive changes in the community structure with the introduction
of the new microorganism ( Ge et al. 2006 ).
ASF as a Microbial Model Community
The ASF provides a well-de ﬁned, limited community of
microorganisms available for manipulation, quanti ﬁcation, and
Figure 2. Stability and relative abundance of the altered Schaedler ﬂora (ASF) in gnotobiotic C3H/HeN mice bred at Iowa State University between 2005 and 2013. (a) Pie
chart representing the relative abundance of the members of the ASF in feces collected and archived in 2005. (b) Pie chart representing the relative ab undance of the
members of the ASF in feces collected and archived in 2013. The relative distribution of taxonomic classes were determined by 16s ribosomal gene seque nce analysis
(V4 variable region) on the Illumina MiSeq platform. While the relative abundance of ASF 360 was below limits of detection by species-speci ﬁc 16s amplicon
sequencing, this species was detectable by end-point PCR analysis of contents from the upper GI tract.
Figure 3. Photomicrograph depicting the use of ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization
(FISH) to evaluate the spatial distribution of the altered Schaedler ﬂora (ASF)
relative to the mucosal epithelium (DAPI stain - blue) of the proximal colon in a
C3H/HeN mouse colonized with the ASF and Escherichia coli . The EUB338-FITC
probe (green) was used as a nonspeci ﬁc probe to detect the ASF with a species-
speciﬁc Cy3-labeled probe for E. coli (orange).
ILAR Journal, 2015, Vol. 56, No. 2 | 173
organism-speciﬁc immune responses. This model has been used
for microbiological, immunological, and metabolic studies. The
ASF have mostly been used in mice, but also in rats and pigs
(Laycock et al. 2012; Rath et al. 1996). However, colonization of gno-
tobiotic pigs was unreliable, as one might expect, because pigs
have their own autochthonous microbiota (Laycock et al. 2012).
Mice colonized with the ASF can be useful to study the impact
of enterobacteria colonization on a model microbial community
because the ASF is devoid of proteobacteria . The ASF was used to
colonize germfree mice, resulting in mice harboring a low-com-
plexity microbiota (LCM) (i.e., raised under barrier conditions) in
order to study colonization resistance of Salmonella enterica
(Stecher et al. 2010 ). These LCM mice were easily colonized
with S. enterica and developed pathological changes intermediate
between conventional and germfree mice. When the authors
cohoused the LCM mice with a mouse harboring a conventional
microbiota, the LCM mice developed colonization resistance
toward S. enterica as evidenced by lower colony-forming units
(CFU) of S. enterica in fecal and cecal samples ( Stecher et al.
2010). The most abundant ASF members identi ﬁed in these
studies were ASF 519 and ASF 500 ( Stecher et al. 2010 ).
The authors have demonstrated the ability to stably colonized
Helicobacter bilis, Campylobacter jejuni, and different E. coli strains in
gnotobiotic C3H/HeN ASF-colonized mice. Microorganisms that
typically do not stably colonize mice with a conventional micro-
biota have been shown to chronically colonize mice with an es-
tablished ASF. Four strains of C. jejuni stably colonized for at
least 7 weeks and LF82, an adherent invasive E. coli strain associ-
ated with Crohn ’s disease, have been stably maintained across
six successive generations of mice (manuscripts in preparation).
Additionally, a study using Helicobacter felis demonstrated stable
colonization of ASF mice, whereas this microorganism was lost
from conventional microbiota mice ( Schmitz et al. 2011 ).
The ASF-colonized mice have been used to evaluate the dy-
namics of the mucosal IgA response to the resident microbiota
(Hapfelmeier et al. 2010 ). Recently, ASF has also been used to
determine that the colonization of the GI tract with bacteria in
the postnatal period is necessary for development of the enteric
nervous system (ENS). In fact, the ENS of ASF-colonized mice was
similar to that found in conventionally reared, SPF animals
(Collins et al. 2014 ). When colonizing germfree MyD88-de ﬁcient
non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice with the ASF, a reduced type 1 di-
abetes (T1D) phenotype, similar to conventional SPF mice, was ob-
served compared with the germfree, MyD88-de ﬁcient NOD mice
(Wen et al. 2008 ). This demonstrates that the ASF community is
sufﬁcient to reduce the tendency to develop T1D mellitus. The
ASF has also been used in the HLA-B27 transgenic rat model of co-
litis to colonize germfree rats, demonstrating that the microbiota,
especially Bacteroides species, contributed to colitis in this model
(Rath et al. 1996 ).
The ASF has been used as a representative subset of the GI mi-
crobiota in order to evaluate the changes in the distribution of the
microbial community following GI perturbation. For example,
colonization of conventional mice with H. pylori was shown to in-
crease the numbers of several members of the ASF (356, 361, 457,
and 500) detected in the stomach by PCR analysis ( Whary et al.
2014). In contrast, co-infection of the mice with Heligmosomoides
polygyrus prevented the H. pylori- induced detection of these
same four ASF members in the stomach ( Whary et al. 2014 ). It
should be stated that the detection of three colonic members of
the ASF (356, 457, and 500) in the stomach by PCR may be due
to their transient presence as a result of coprophagy. Another
study with H. pylori used a subset of the ASF to augment gastric
cancer progression mouse model ( Lertpiriyapong et al. 2014 ).
Collectively, the use of the ASF as representatives of the lower
bowel microbiota demonstrated that spatial changes in microbial
colonization along the GI tract likely contributed to ongoing
inﬂammation and development of precancerous dysplasia.
ASF Microbiological Functions In Vivo
The importance of the microbiota with respect to contributing to
the nutritional needs of the host is well documented. For exam-
ple, the GI microbiota produce short chain fatty acids (SCFAs)
such as butyrate by digestion of dietary ﬁber, and butyrate has
been described as a major energy source for colonic epithelial
cells. In addition, Garrett and colleagues have demonstrated
that SCFAs are capable of attenuating the severity of colitis
(Smith et al. 2013). With respect to using the ASF to study produc-
tion of SCFAs, ASF 356 and ASF 492 have been shown to produce
large amounts of SCFAs in vivo and in vitro ( Smith et al. 2013 ).
Because the ASF genomes have now been sequenced, it is now
possible to evaluate the metabolic pathways responsible for pro-
duction of SCFAs and to predict metabolic changes (i.e., metabo-
lites) that would be associated with dietary changes or those
associated with disease. The ASF is a stable community, suggest-
ing that each member of the ASF contributes metabolically to the
homeostasis of this model microbiota and/or to that of the host
(Figure 2). In this regard, ASF-colonized animals have been used
to evaluate the role of intestinal bacteria in the metabolic activa-
tion of nitrotoluene into a genotoxin. It was demonstrated that
ASF-colonized animals were less ef ﬁcient at metabolizing the
compound (Doolittle et al. 1983 ). Members of the ASF have been
used to evaluate foraging of host metabolites by the microbiota,
demonstrating that a simpliﬁed microbiota was not as efﬁcient as
a complex microbiota at utilizing these host-derived compounds
(e.g., mucins) ( Berry et al. 2013 ).
ASF and Gut Immunology Research
ASF colonization has been used in several studies to evaluate
components of mucosal immunity including CD4 + T cells, IgA,
and RegIII-γ. ASF-colonized mice have also been used to demon-
strate that microbial antigens are necessary for homeostatic de-
velopment of mucosal T cells in the colonic lamina propria;
speciﬁcally, the ASF was shown to be suf ﬁcient to induce regula-
tory T cells (iT REG cells) and to induce both spontaneous and ho-
meostatic T cell proliferation that was essential to establish GI
immune homeostasis ( Feng et al. 2010 ). Furthermore, germfree
mice reconstituted with the ASF lacked Th17 cells and had in-
creased proportions of FoxP3 + TREG cells in the small intestinal
lamina propria ( Ivanov et al. 2008 ). Because of the complexity of
a conventional microbiota, it is difﬁcult to evaluate the role of the
GI microbiota in the development of mutualistic immune adap-
tations. To address these limitations, Geuking and colleagues
used ASF-colonized mice to study the maintenance of mutualis-
tic CD4 + T cells response ( Geuking et al. 2011 ). Following treat-
ment of these ASF-colonized mice with low-dose dextran
sulfate sodium (DSS), the colonic lamina proprial T cells respons-
es were characterized by the presence of iT REG cells and the ab-
sence of demonstrable Th1 or Th17 cells, which resulted in the
maintenance of mucosal homeostasis ( Geuking et al. 2011 ).
While ASF 519 was the dominant organism in the GI microbiota
of these mice, colonization with ASF 519 alone, unlike B. fragilis,
was unable to induce an expansion of the iT REG cell population,
demonstrating the necessity for a community of organisms to es-
tablish mucosal homeostasis ( Geuking et al. 2011 ; Round and
Mazmanian 2010 ). Additionally, a later study demonstrated that
174 | Wymore Brand et al.
ASF colonization was suf ﬁcient to induce thymic stromal lym-
phopoietin (TSLP) expression that was critical for the prevention
of the exaggerated production of IL-17A in the colonic lamina
propria (Geuking et al. 2011 ; Mosconi et al. 2013 ).
The colonization of the GI tract with the ASF alone was suf ﬁ-
cient to stimulate the development of mucosal immunity as dem-
onstrated by Ivanov and colleagues (2008) . These authors were
able to show that reconstitution of germfree mice with the ASF in-
duces the production of natural secretory IgA in the gut at levels
equivalent to that detected in SPF mice; however, the number of
IgA+ plasmablasts in the small intestinal lamina propria were re-
d u c e dc o m p a r e dw i t hS P Fm i c e(Cong et al. 2009 ; Hapfelmeier
et al. 2010; Ivanov et al. 2008). Another study investigated the dy-
namics of microbiota-speci ﬁc secretory IgA and used ASF colo-
nized mice to demonstrate that IgA speci ﬁcity is determined by
the immunodominant antigens of the resident microbiota. More-
over, the loss of transient microorganisms correlates with the at-
trition of the respective antigen-speci ﬁc IgA-secreting plasma
cells in the lamina propria (Hapfelmeier et al. 2010). Cong and col-
leagues utilized ASF mice to demonstrate that IgA-mediated im-
mune exclusion of bacterial ﬂagellin was antigen-speci ﬁca n d
was not polyspeci ﬁc( Cong et al. 2009 ). While several of the ASF
express ﬂagella, ASF-colonized mice were useful in these studies
because they possess a limited bacterial antigen load due to the
small size of this bacterial community and, thus, lack preexisting
antibody to antigen(s) not present (i.e., anti-CBir1 ﬂagellin anti-
body) (Cong et al. 2009 ). Because the ASF promotes the develop-
ment of mucosal immunity, the limited complexity of the ASF
community allows colonization with new microorganisms
(e.g., Proteobacteria) unrelated to the existing community and
can thus be used to evaluate antigen-speci ﬁcm u c o s a lI g At o
the newly introduced organism within the context of a resident
microbial community ( Cong et al. 2009 ).
There are >170 genes now identiﬁed as susceptibility markers
for in ﬂammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), and polymorphisms or
deﬁciencies in Nod1 and Nod2 have been directly linked to IBD
susceptibility ( Jostins et al. 2012 ). In this regard, SPF and ASF-
colonized Nod1 −/−;N o d 2−/− mice were used to evaluate the
impact of the microbial complexity on intestinal barrier function
and susceptibility to DSS-induced colitis (Natividad et al. 2012). In
comparison to an SPF microbiota, Natividad and colleagues dem-
onstrated that colonization of Nod1 −/−;N o d 2−/− mice with the
ASF attenuated the severity of DSS-induced colitis. While the
ASF-colonized Nod1 −/−; Nod2 −/− mice presented with increased
epithelial permeability, there was no evidence of spontaneous
colitis. In addition, ASF colonization was suf ﬁcient to normalize
RegIII-γ expression when compared with Nod1;Nod2 suf ﬁcient
mice ( Natividad et al. 2012 ). The same authors subsequently
demonstrated that ASF-colonized mice expressed Reg III-γ at
lower levels when compared with mice with a complex SPF mi-
crobiota ( Natividad et al. 2013 ). Collectively, these studies indi-
cate that ASF-colonized mice can be used to interrogate the role
of the microbiota in the onset of IBD and that the ASF is a micro-
bial community lacking “colitogenic” bacteria that initiate spon-
taneous IBD as seen in other genetic models of IBD. Due to the
reduced microbial complexity, ASF-colonized mice can also be
used to evaluate the bene ﬁts of probiotic bacterial species to at-
tenuate disease in genetically susceptible colitic mice ( Natividad
et al. 2013).
ASF and Colitis Research
IL-10−/− mice maintained under traditional housing conditions
develop severe enterocolitis, while SPF IL-10 −/− mice (i.e., likely
colonized by Helicobacter species) develop localized colitis ( Kuhn
et al. 1993). Because the ASF was designed to be free of any mem-
bers of the Proteobacteria (e.g., Helicobacter, Campylobacter, Escher-
ichia), ASF-colonized mice can be used to evaluate the impact of
speciﬁc members of the Proteobacteria on the development of co-
litis in genetically susceptible mice. Unlike conventionally reared
IL-10−/− mice, ASF-colonized IL-10 −/− mice fail to develop colitis
or exhibit very mild disease, emphasizing the impact of the mi-
crobiota in this colitis model ( Stehr et al. 2009 ). The ASF commu-
nity has proven useful as a microbial GI community to evaluate
the underlying mechanisms by which introduction of microbial
provocateurs directly contributes to the onset of colitis. For ex-
ample, it has been demonstrated that SPF IL-10−/− mice colonized
with Helicobacter trogontum developed typhlocolitis shortly after
infection; in addition, the relative abundance of some of the
ASF members decreased during the H. trogontum-induced inﬂam-
matory response, consistent with the observed dysbiosis in IBD
patients ( Whary et al. 2006 ). Using ASF-colonized SCID mice,
Cahill and colleagues demonstrated that Helicobacter hepaticus
alone was insuf ﬁcient to trigger IBD-like colitis in the absence
of CD45RBHigh CD4+ T cells (Cahill et al. 1997). Because of their de-
ﬁned nature, ASF-colonized mice have been used to demonstrate
that there are decided interactions between the host immune
system, in ﬂammatory triggers provided by individual bacterial
provocateurs, and onset of colitis in genetically susceptible mice.
Induction of typhlocolitis in gnotobiotic ASF mice colonized
with either H. bilis or Brachyspira hyodysenteriae was accompanied
by the induction of ASF-speci ﬁc serum antibody. In contrast, the
severity of typhlocolitis in the B. hyodysenteriae-infected ASF mice
was less severe and more variable than that observed in H. bilis-
colonized ASF mice ( Jergens et al. 2006 ). As the previous studies
focused on the host response to the provocateur ( Cahill et al.
1997; Whary et al. 2006 ), more recent studies have focused on
the host response to the ASF ( Jergens et al. 2007 ). Because each
of the ASF is cultivable in complex media including brain heart
infusion medium or Schaedler ’s medium supplemented with
bovine serum, host immune responses to the “entire” microbiota
can be evaluated. In another study, gnotobiotic ASF mice colo-
nized with H. bilis demonstrated increased ASF-speci ﬁc serum
antibody and CD4+ T cell responses ( Jergens et al. 2007 ). A subse-
quent study using a similar study design used microarray
analysis to demonstrate differential mucosal gene expression as-
sociated with fatty acid metabolism and detoxi ﬁcation in a time
course following H. bilis colonization (Liu et al. 2009). The addition
of low-dose DSS treatment to induce colitis demonstrated that
H. bilis increases the host ’s sensitivity to a mild colitic insult by
initiating in ﬂammation and disrupting mucosal homeostasis
(Liu et al. 2011 ).
Limitations of the ASF Model
With a limited, de ﬁned microbiota, ASF mice lack the functional
redundancy and metabolic capacity of a conventional microbiota
(Norin and Midtvedt 2010 ). It could be argued that one limitation
of the ASF community is that it may be considered dysbiotic (i.e.,
limited diversity). Regardless, it is evident that ASF-colonized
mice are immunologically, repro ductively, and metabolically
similar to conventional mice. The limited nature of the ASF
should allow investigators to evaluate the in vivo effect of other
bacterial species (e.g., segmented ﬁlamentous bacteria) on the
community dynamics as well as mucosal homeostasis (i.e., de-
velopment of Th17 cells). In contrast, additional iterations of
the ASF community to further limit the diversity and metabolic
capabilities of this consortium of microorganisms would also
ILAR Journal, 2015, Vol. 56, No. 2 | 175
be informative. Recently, this has been successfully addressed by
colonizing mice with three ASF members, ASF356Clostridium spe-
cies, ASF361 Lactobacillus murinus, and ASF519 Parabacteroides gold-
steinii, to study colonization dynamics in a mouse model of H.
pylori-induced gastric cancer ( Lertpiriyapong et al. 2014 ). While
it can be informative to further reduce the GI microbiota, it
would be extremely laborious to construct “altered” ASF commu-
nities that lack one or more of the ASF microorganisms to evalu-
ate the factorial interactions of this model community. Lastly,
even though all members of the ASF community can be cultivat-
ed in vitro (e.g., BHI plus serum or Schaedler ’s medium plus
serum), there have been no published works describing the repli-
cation of the EOS members (356, 492, 500, and 502) on a de ﬁned
medium. Therefore, there is a need to develop better in vitro
culture techniques to fully realize the potential that this model
community can provide with respect to bacterial –bacterial inter-
actions and bacterial –host interactions.
Conclusions
The usefulness of the ASF model is multidimensional. The ASF
bacteria form a stable community that is effectively transmitted
from dam to each offspring over the long term (MJW, personal ob-
servation – stable colonization for 14 years at Iowa State Univer-
sity). In addition, as all microorganisms can be cultured in vitro,
bacterial antigen can be prepared to test immune responses to in-
dividual organisms by evaluating for antigen-speciﬁc antibody or
ex vivo cell stimulation ( Jergens et al. 2006 , 2007). With the avail-
ability of ASF genome sequences, every microorganism within
the community can be detected and quanti ﬁed by qPCR and in-
terrogated by amplicon sequencing, and expression of individual
genes of interest can be monitored. Because the ASF community
possesses eight bacterial species, this can be viewed as both an
advantage and a limitation of this model community. The ASF of-
fers the advantage of studying a stable consortium of bacterial
species that can be used to understand the “operating system ”
of the gut microbiome that describes and potentially predicts
community dynamics following a variety of perturbations in-
cluding diet; introduction of other bacteria, fungi, or viruses;
and induction of in ﬂammation, as well as the in ﬂuence of the
host genetic background on the gut community. The limitations
of the ASF must also be realized in as much that this consortium
is less complex than the microbiota of conventional animals and
may be limited in its ability to fully predict the impact of a micro-
bial community on the health of the host. Although the original
Schaedler ﬂora is celebrating its 50 th anniversary, the develop-
ment of new techniques and technologies along with the avail-
ability of de ﬁn e dm i c r o b i o t ar o d e n tm o d e l so f f e r su n i q u e
opportunities to study host –microbiota interactions well beyond
what may have been envisioned by Schaedler in 1965.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health
(R01GM099537 to GJP, AEJ, and MJW; and R01OD011141,
R01CA093405, P30ES002109, and P01CA028842 to JGF) and the
Kenneth Rainin Foundation (to AEJ, MJW and GJP). The authors
would also like to acknowledge Dr. Tim Brenza for his assistance
with preparing scanning electron photomicrographs.
References
Alexander AD, Orcutt RP, Henry JC, Baker J Jr., Bissahoyo AC,
Threadgill DW. 2006. Quantitative PCR assays for mouse
enteric ﬂora reveal strain-dependent differences in composi-
tion that are in ﬂuenced by the microenvironment. Mamm
Genome 17:1093–1104.
Baker DE. 1966. The commercial production of mice with a spec-
iﬁed ﬂora. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 20:161 –166.
Bauer H, Horowitz RE, Levenson SM, Popper H. 1963. The response
of the lymphatic tissue to the microbial ﬂora. Studies on
germfree mice. Am J Pathol 42:471 –483.
Berry D, Stecher B, Schintlmeister A, Reichert J, Brugiroux S,
W i l dB ,W a n e kW ,R i c h t e rA ,R a u c hI ,D e c k e rT ,L o yA ,
Wagner M. 2013. Host-compound foraging by intestinal mi-
crobiota revealed by single-cell stable isotope probing. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 110:4720 –4725.
Cahill RJ, Foltz CJ, Fox JG, Dangler CA, Powrie F, Schauer DB. 1997.
Inﬂammatory bowel disease: an immunity-mediated condi-
tion triggered by bacterial infection with Helicobacter hepaticus.
Infect Immun 65:3126 –3131.
Collins J, Borojevic R, Verdu EF, Huizinga JD, Ratcliffe EM. 2014. In-
testinal microbiota in ﬂuence the early postnatal develop-
ment of the enteric nervous system. Neurogastroenterol
Motil 26:98–107.
Cong Y, Feng T, Fujihashi K, Schoeb TR, Elson CO. 2009. A domi-
nant, coordinated T regulatory cell-IgA response to the intes-
tinal microbiota. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:19256 –19261.
Dethlefsen L, McFall-Ngai M, Relman DA. 2007. An ecological and
evolutionary perspective on human-microbe mutualism and
disease. Nature 449:811 –818.
Dewhirst FE, Chien CC, Paster BJ, Ericson RL, Orcutt RP, Schauer DB,
Fox JG. 1999. Phylogeny of the de ﬁned murine microbiota:
altered Schaedler ﬂora. Appl Environ Microbiol 65:3287–3292.
Doolittle DJ, Sherrill JM, Butterworth BE. 1983. In ﬂuence of intes-
tinal bacteria, sex of the animal, and position of the nitro
group on the hepatic genotoxicity of nitrotoluene isomers in
vivo. Cancer Res 43:2836 –2842.
Dubos R, Schaedler RW, Costello R, Hoet P. 1965. Indigenous, nor-
mal, and autochthonous ﬂora of the gastrointestinal tract.
J Exp Med 122:67 –76.
Dubos RJ, Schaedler RW. 1962. The effect of diet on the fecal bac-
terial ﬂora of mice and on their resistance to infection. J Exp
Med 115:1161–1172.
Duca FA, Sakar Y, Lepage P, Devime F, Langelier B, Dore J,
Covasa M. 2014. Replication of obesity and associated signal-
ing pathways through transfer of microbiota from obese-
prone rats. Diabetes 63:1624 –1636.
E c k b u r gP B ,B i kE M ,B e r n s t e i nC N ,P u r d o mE ,D e t h l e f s e nL ,
Sargent M, Gill SR, Nelson KE, Relman DA. 2005. Diversity of
the human intestinal microbial ﬂora. Science 308:1635 –1638.
Faith JJ, Guruge JL, Charbonneau M, Subramanian S, Seedorf H,
Goodman AL, Clemente JC, Knight R, Heath AC, Leibel RL,
Rosenbaum M, Gordon JI. 2013. The long-term stability of
the human gut microbiota. Science 341:1237439.
Feng T, Wang L, Schoeb TR, Elson CO, Cong Y. 2010. Microbiota in-
nate stimulation is a prerequisite for T cell spontaneous pro-
liferation and induction of experimental colitis. J Exp Med
207:1321–1332.
Ge Z, Feng Y, Taylor NS, Ohtani M, Polz MF, Schauer DB, Fox JG.
2006. Colonization dynamics of altered Schaedler ﬂora is in-
ﬂuenced by gender, aging, and Helicobacter hepaticus infec-
tion in the intestines of Swiss Webster mice. Appl Environ
Microbiol 72:5100–5103.
Geuking MB, Cahenzli J, Lawson MA, Ng DC, Slack E,
Hapfelmeier S, McCoy KD, Macpherson AJ. 2011. Intestinal
bacterial colonization induces mutualistic regulatory T cell
responses. Immunity 34:794 –806.
176 | Wymore Brand et al.
H a p f e l m e i e rS ,L a w s o nM A ,S l a c kE ,K i r u n d iJ K ,S t o e lM ,
Heikenwalder M, Cahenzli J, Velykoredko Y, Balmer ML,
Endt K, Geuking MB, Curtiss R 3rd, McCoy KD,
Macpherson AJ. 2010. Reversible microbial colonization of
germ-free mice reveals the dynamics of IgA immune respons-
es. Science 328:1705 –1709.
Horowitz RE, Bauer H, Paronetto F, Abrams GD, Watkins KC,
Popper H. 1964. The response of the lymphatic tissue to bacte-
rial antigen. Studies in germfree mice. Am J Pathol 44:747–761.
Ivanov II, Frutos Rde L, Manel N, Yoshinaga K, Rifkin DB,
Sartor RB, Finlay BB, Littman DR. 2008. Speci ﬁc microbiota di-
rect the differentiation of IL-17-producing T-helper cells in
the mucosa of the small intestine. Cell Host Microbe
4:337–349.
Jergens AE, Dorn A, Wilson J, Dingbaum K, Henderson A, Liu Z,
Hostetter J, Evans RB, Wannemuehler MJ. 2006. Induction of
differential immune reactivity to members of the ﬂora of gno-
tobiotic mice following colonization with Helicobacter bilis or
Brachyspira hyodysenteriae. Microbes Infect 8:1602 –1610.
Jergens AE, Wilson-Welder JH, Dorn A, Henderson A, Liu Z,
Evans RB, Hostetter J, Wannemuehler MJ. 2007. Helicobacter
bilis triggers persistent immune reactivity to antigens derived
from the commensal bacteria in gnotobiotic C3H/HeN mice.
Gut 56:934–940.
Jostins L, Ripke S, Weersma RK, Duerr RH, McGovern DP, Hui KY,
Lee JC, Schumm LP, Sharma Y, Anderson CA, Essers J,
Mitrovic M, Ning K, Cleynen I, Theatre E, Spain SL,
Raychaudhuri S, Goyette P, Wei Z, Abraham C, Achkar JP,
Ahmad T, Amininejad L, Ananthakrishnan AN, Andersen V,
Andrews JM, Baidoo L, Balschun T, Bampton PA, Bitton A,
Boucher G, Brand S, Buning C, Cohain A, Cichon S,
D’Amato M, De Jong D, Devaney KL, Dubinsky M, Edwards C,
Ellinghaus D, Ferguson LR, Franchimont D, Fransen K,
Gearry R, Georges M, Gieger C, Glas J, Haritunians T, Hart A,
Hawkey C, Hedl M, Hu X, Karlsen TH, Kupcinskas L,
Kugathasan S, Latiano A, Laukens D, Lawrance IC, Lees CW,
L o u i sE ,M a h yG ,M a n s ﬁeld J, Morgan AR, Mowat C,
Newman W, Palmieri O, Ponsioen CY, Potocnik U,
Prescott NJ, Regueiro M, Rotter JI, Russell RK, Sanderson JD,
Sans M, Satsangi J, Schreiber S, Simms LA, Sventoraityte J,
Targan SR, Taylor KD, Tremelling M, Verspaget HW, De
Vos M, Wijmenga C, Wilson DC, Winkelmann J, Xavier RJ,
Zeissig S, Zhang B, Zhang CK, Zhao H, Silverberg MS,
Annese V, Hakonarson H, Brant SR, Radford-Smith G,
Mathew CG, Rioux JD, Schadt EE, Daly MJ, Franke A,
Parkes M, Vermeire S, Barrett JC, Cho JH. 2012. Host-microbe
interactions have shaped the genetic architecture of in ﬂam-
matory bowel disease. Nature 491:119 –124.
Kuhn R, Lohler J, Rennick D, Rajewsky K, Muller W. 1993. Interleu-
kin-10-de ﬁcient mice develop chronic enterocolitis. Cell
75:263–274.
Laycock G, Sait L, Inman C, Lewis M, Smidt H, van Diemen P,
Jorgensen F, Stevens M, Bailey M. 2012. A de ﬁned intestinal
colonization microbiota for gnotobiotic pigs. Vet Immunol
Immunopathol 149(3–4):216–224.
Lertpiriyapong K, Whary MT, Muthupalani S, Lofgren JL,
Gamazon ER, Feng Y, Ge Z, Wang TC, Fox JG. 2014. Gastric col-
onisation with a restricted commensal microbiota replicates
the promotion of neoplastic lesions by diverse intestinal mi-
crobiota in the Helicobacter pylori INS-GAS mouse model of
gastric carcinogenesis. Gut 63:54 –63.
Lesher S, Walburg HE Jr., Sacher GA Jr. 1964. Generation cycle in
the duodenal crypt cells of germ-free and conventional
mice. Nature 202:884 –886.
Ley RE, Peterson DA, Gordon JI. 2006. Ecological and evolutionary
forces shaping microbial diversity in the human intestine.
Cell 124:837–848.
Liu Z, Henderson AL, Nettleton D, Wilson-Welder JH,
Hostetter JM, Ramer-Tait A, Jergens AE, Wannemuehler MJ.
2009. Mucosal gene expression pro ﬁles following the coloni-
zation of immunocompetent de ﬁned-ﬂora C3H mice with
Helicobacter bilis : a prelude to typhlocolitis. Microbes Infect
11:374–383.
Liu Z, Ramer-Tait AE, Henderson AL, Demirkale CY, Nettleton D,
Wang C, Hostetter JM, Jergens AE, Wannemuehler MJ. 2011.
Helicobacter bilis colonization enhances susceptibility to ty-
phlocolitis following an in ﬂammatory trigger. Dig Dis Sci
56:2838–2848.
Luckey TD. 1972. Introduction to intestinal microecology. Am J
Clin Nutr 25:1292 –1294.
McCafferty J, Muhlbauer M, Gharaibeh RZ, Arthur JC, Perez-
Chanona E, Sha W, Jobin C, Fodor AA. 2013. Stochastic
changes over time and not founder effects drive cage effects
in microbial community assembly in a mouse model. Isme J
7:2116–2125.
Momose Y, Park SH, Miyamoto Y, Itoh K. 2011. Design of species-
speciﬁc oligonucleotide probes for the detection of Bacteroides
and Parabacteroides by ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization and
their application to the analysis of mouse caecal Bacteroides-
Parabacteroides microbiota. J Appl Microbiol 111:176 –184.
Mosconi I, Geuking MB, Zaiss MM, Massacand JC, Aschwanden C,
Kwong Chung CK, McCoy KD, Harris NL. 2013. Intestinal bac-
teria induce TSLP to promote mutualistic T-cell responses.
Mucosal Immunol 6:1157 –1167.
Natividad JM, Hayes CL, Motta JP, Jury J, Galipeau HJ, Philip V,
Garcia-Rodenas CL, Kiyama H, Bercik P, Verdu EF. 2013. Differ-
ential induction of antimicrobial REGIII by the intestinal
microbiota and Biﬁdobacterium breve NCC2950. Appl Environ
Microbiol 79:7745–7754.
N a t i v i d a dJ M ,P e t i tV ,H u a n gX ,d eP a l m aG ,J u r yJ ,S a n zY ,
Philpott D, Garcia Rodenas CL, McCoy KD, Verdu EF. 2012.
Commensal and probiotic bacteria inﬂuence intestinal barrier
function and susceptibility to colitis in Nod1−/−; Nod2−/− mice.
Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 18:1434 –1446.
Norin E, Midtvedt T. 2010. Intestinal micro ﬂora functions in labo-
ratory mice claimed to harbor a“normal” intestinal microﬂora.
Is the SPF concept running out of date? Anaerobe 16:311 –313.
O’Hara AM, Shanahan F. 2006. The gut ﬂora as a forgotten organ.
EMBO Rep 7:688 –693.
Orcutt RP, Gianni FJ, Judge RJ. 1987. Development of an “altered
Schaedler ﬂora” for NCI gnotobiotic rodents. Microecology
and Therapy 17:59.
Park SH, Itoh K. 2005. Species-speci ﬁc oligonucleotide probes for
the detection and identi ﬁcation of Lactobacillus isolated from
mouse faeces. J Appl Microbiol 99:51 –57.
Rath HC, Herfarth HH, Ikeda JS, Grenther WB, Hamm TE Jr.,
Balish E, Taurog JD, Hammer RE, Wilson KH, Sartor RB. 1996.
Normal luminal bacteria, especially Bacteroides species, medi-
ate chronic colitis, gastritis, and arthritis in HLA-B27/human
ß2 microglobulin transgenic rats. J Clin Invest 98:945 –953.
Robertson BR, O’Rourke JL, Neilan BA, Vandamme P, On SL, Fox JG,
Lee A. 2005. Mucispirillum schaedleri gen. nov., sp. nov., a spiral-
shaped bacterium colonizing the mucus layer of the gastroin-
testinal tract of laboratory rodents. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
55:1199–1204.
Round JL, Mazmanian SK. 2010. Inducible Foxp3+ regulatory
T-cell development by a commensal bacterium of the intesti-
nal microbiota. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:12204 –12209.
ILAR Journal, 2015, Vol. 56, No. 2 | 177
Sarma-Rupavtarm RB, Ge Z, Schauer DB, Fox JG, Polz MF. 2004.
Spatial distribution and stability of the eight microbial species
of the altered schaedler ﬂora in the mouse gastrointestinal
tract. Appl Environ Microbiol 70:2791 –2800.
Savage DC. 1977. Microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal tract.
Annu Rev Microbiol 31:107 –133.
Savage DC, Dubos R, Schaedler RW. 1968. The gastrointestinal ep-
ithelium and its autochthonous bacterial ﬂora. J Exp Med
127:67–76.
Savage DC, McAllister JS, Davis CP. 1971. Anaerobic bacteria on
the mucosal epithelium of the murine large bowel. Infect
Immun 1971:492–502.
Schaedler RW, Dubs R, Costello R. 1965. Association of germfree
mice with bacteria isolated from normal mice. J Exp Med
122:77–82.
Schmitz JM, Durham CG, Schoeb TR, Soltau TD, Wolf KJ,
Tanner SM, McCracken VJ, Lorenz RG. 2011. Helicobacter felis -
associated gastric disease in microbiota-restricted mice.
J Histochem Cytochem 59:826 –841.
Schoeb TR, Bullard DC. 2012. Microbial and histopathologic con-
siderations in the use of mouse models of in ﬂammatory
bowel diseases. In ﬂamm Bowel Dis 18:1558 –1565.
Smith PM, Howitt MR, Panikov N, Michaud M, Gallini CA,
Bohlooly YM, Glickman JN, Garrett WS. 2013. The microbial
metabolites, short-chain fatty acids, regulate colonic Treg
cell homeostasis. Science 341:569 –573.
Stecher B, Chaffron S, Kappeli R, Hapfelmeier S, Freedrich S,
W e b e rT C ,K i r u n d iJ ,S u a rM ,M c C o yK D ,v o nM e r i n gC ,
Macpherson AJ, Hardt WD. 2010. Like will to like: abundances
of closely related species can predict susceptibility to intesti-
nal colonization by pathogenic and commensal bacteria. PLoS
Pathog 6:e1000711.
Stehr M, Greweling MC, Tischer S, Singh M, Blocker H, Monner DA,
Muller W. 2009. Charles River altered Schaedler ﬂora (CRASF)
remained stable for four years in a mouse colony housed in
individually ventilated cages. Lab Anim 43:362 –370.
Thompson GR, Trexler PC. 1971. Gastrointestinal structure and
function in germ-free or gnotobiotic animals. Gut 12:230 –235.
Trexler PC, Orcutt RP. 1999. Development of gnotobiotics and
contamination control in laboratory animal science. In:
Macpherson CW, Mattingly SF, eds. 50 Years of Laboratory
Animal Science. Memphis: American Association for Labora-
tory Animal Science. p. 121 –128.
Turnbaugh PJ, Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, Knight R, Gordon JI.
2009. The effect of diet on the human gut microbiome: a
metagenomic analysis in humanized gnotobiotic mice. Sci
Transl Med 1:6ra14.
Wannemuehler MJ, Overstreet AM, Ward DV, Phillips GJ. 2014.
Draft genome sequences of the altered schaedler ﬂora, a de-
ﬁned bacterial community from gnotobiotic mice. Genome
Announc 2:e00287–14.
Wen L, Ley RE, Volchkov PY, Stranges PB, Avanesyan L,
Stonebraker AC, Hu C, Wong FS, Szot GL, Bluestone JA,
Gordon JI, Chervonsky A V. 2008. Innate immunity and intesti-
nal microbiota in the development of Type 1 diabetes. Nature
455:1109–1113.
Whary MT, Danon SJ, Feng Y, Ge Z, Sundina N, Ng V, Taylor NS,
Rogers AB, Fox JG. 2006. Rapid onset of ulcerative typhloco-
litis in B6.129P2-IL10 tm1Cgn (IL-10 −/−) mice infected with
Helicobacter trogontum is associated with decreased coloni-
zation by altered Schaedler ’s ﬂora. Infect Immun 74:
6615– 6623.
W h a r yM T ,M u t h u p a l a n iS ,G eZ ,F e n gY ,L o f g r e nJ ,S h iH N ,
Taylor NS, Correa P, Versalovic J, Wang TC, Fox JG. 2014. Hel-
minth co-infection in Helicobacter pylori infected INS-GAS
mice attenuates gastric premalignant lesions of epithelial
dysplasia and glandular atrophy and preserves colonization
resistance of the stomach to lower bowel microbiota.
Microbes Infect 16:345 –355.
Whitman WB, Coleman DC, Wiebe WJ. 1998. Prokaryotes: the un-
seen majority. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:6578 –6583.
Zoetendal EG, von Wright A, Vilpponen-Salmela T, Ben-Amor K,
Akkermans AD, de Vos WM. 2002. Mucosa-associated bacteria
in the human gastrointestinal tract are uniformly distributed
along the colon and differ from the community recovered
from feces. Appl Environ Microbiol 68:3401 –3407.
178 | Wymore Brand et al.
