1. iScience. 2026 Aug 8;29(8):117105. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2026.117105.
eCollection  2026 Aug 21.

The use of multi-species probiotic-derived vesicles to encapsulate luteolin for 
preventing colitis in a mouse model.

Hou S(1), Yang H(1)(2), Wang Q(1), Zheng X(1), Li R(1)(2), He H(1), Wang L(1), 
Zhao T(1), Shuai Q(1), Sun Y(3), Jin T(4), Liu Z(1), Xie J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medicine, 
Shanxi Key Laboratory of Birth Defect and Cell Regeneration, MOE Key Laboratory 
of Coal Environmental Pathogenicity and Prevention, Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, Shanxi 030001, China.
(2)Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 
030001, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030001, China.
(4)Banting and Best Diabetes Centre and Department of Physiology, Temerty 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Probiotic-derived membrane vesicles (MVs) offer advantages over live probiotics, 
including lower immunogenicity and enhanced bioavailability of dietary 
compounds. However, their composition and function depend on culture conditions. 
In this study, MVs from a single probiotic strain (S-MVs) were compared with 
those from co-cultured multi-species probiotics (M-MVs). M-MVs showed superior 
radical scavenging ability due to characteristic antioxidant proteins. Luteolin 
(Lut), a hydrophobic flavonoid, was loaded into M-MVs to generate Lut-MVs. 
Compared with Lut or M-MVs alone, Lut-MVs had enhanced water solubility, 
gastrointestinal stability, and antioxidative capacity. In a dextran sulfate 
sodium (DSS)-induced mouse colitis model, Lut-MVs prevented colitis by 
alleviating oxidative damage, improving intestinal barrier function, reducing 
inflammatory responses, and regulating colonic microbial balance. This work 
provides a method for preparing probiotic-derived vesicles and highlights their 
potential as carriers for hydrophobic drugs in treating colon diseases.

© 2026 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2026.117105
PMCID: PMC13476518
PMID: 42604006

Conflict of interest statement: A patent application (application no. 
202410929420.1, pending) covering the multi-species probiotics loaded with 
luteolin (Lut-MVs) described in this manuscript has been filed by Shanxi Medical 
University. The inventors include S.H., H.Y., J.X., T.Z., Z.L., H.Z., Y.S., 
L.W., and Z.M., not all of whom are co-authors of this article.

===== OPEN-ACCESS FULL TEXT (Europe PMC PMC13476518) =====

pmc iScience iScience 3532 isci 101724038 iScience 2589-0042 Elsevier PMC13476518 PMC13476518.1 13476518 13476518 42604006 10.1016/j.isci.2026.117105 S2589-0042(26)02483-1 117105 1 Article The use of multi-species probiotic-derived vesicles to encapsulate luteolin for preventing colitis in a mouse model Hou Shulin hou_shulin1@163.com 1 5 6 ∗ Yang Haishan 1 2 5 Wang Qian 1 5 Zheng Xin 1 Li Ruining 1 2 He Huili 1 Wang Lei 1 Zhao Taoran 1 Shuai Qizhi 1 Sun Yaojun 3 Jin Tianru 4 Liu Zhizhen zhizhenliu2013@163.com 1 ∗∗ Xie Jun 1 1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medicine, Shanxi Key Laboratory of Birth Defect and Cell Regeneration, MOE Key Laboratory of Coal Environmental Pathogenicity and Prevention, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030001, China 2 Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030001, China 3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030001, China 4 Banting and Best Diabetes Centre and Department of Physiology, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada ∗ Corresponding author hou_shulin1@163.com ∗∗ Corresponding author zhizhenliu2013@163.com 5 These authors contributed equally 6 Lead contact 21 8 2026 08 8 2026 29 8517546 117105 21 11 2025 31 3 2026 22 7 2026 08 08 2026 16 08 2026 26 08 2026 © 2026 The Author(s) 2026 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Summary Probiotic-derived membrane vesicles (MVs) offer advantages over live probiotics, including lower immunogenicity and enhanced bioavailability of dietary compounds. However, their composition and function depend on culture conditions. In this study, MVs from a single probiotic strain (S-MVs) were compared with those from co-cultured multi-species probiotics (M-MVs). M-MVs showed superior radical scavenging ability due to characteristic antioxidant proteins. Luteolin (Lut), a hydrophobic flavonoid, was loaded into M-MVs to generate Lut-MVs. Compared with Lut or M-MVs alone, Lut-MVs had enhanced water solubility, gastrointestinal stability, and antioxidative capacity. In a dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced mouse colitis model, Lut-MVs prevented colitis by alleviating oxidative damage, improving intestinal barrier function, reducing inflammatory responses, and regulating colonic microbial balance. This work provides a method for preparing probiotic-derived vesicles and highlights their potential as carriers for hydrophobic drugs in treating colon diseases. Graphical abstract Highlights • Multi-species MVs show better antioxidant activity due to unique proteins • Lut-MVs improve luteolin’s solubility, stability, and antioxidant effect • Lut-MVs prevent colitis by reducing oxidative damage and inflammation • They also enhance gut barrier and modulate colonic microbiota Drug delivery system; Biological sciences; Microbiology; Omics Keywords multi-species probiotic-derived vesicles luteolin colitis intestinal barrier anti-inflammation microbiota regulation pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY-NC-ND Introduction Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), encompassing ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease, is a chronic inflammation involving dysbiosis of the intestinal microenvironment. Multiple dietary and environmental factors contribute to the risk of IBD development. To date, the incidence rate of UC has been increasing sharply in low- and middle-income countries, while it continues to rise in some high-income countries. 1 , 2 , 3 Individuals with IBD are experiencing a severe decline in quality of life and an elevated risk of anxiety and depression. 4 , 5 , 6 Furthermore, patients have an increased susceptibility to colorectal cancer. 1 Conventional treatments for IBD, such as antioxidant drugs like 5-aminosalicylates, 7 , 8 anti-inflammatory drugs including corticosteroids, and immunosuppressive agents, 9 , 10 have limited efficacy and are associated with adverse side effects, driving researchers to seek new and effective therapies. Dysbiosis of the gut microbiota is among the primary causes of IBD. Some probiotics have demonstrated potential in alleviating IBD by restoring intestinal microecological homeostasis. For instance, Bifidobacterium longum (B. longum) BAA2573 was shown to modulate the gut microbiome and metabolites, thereby ameliorating dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in mice. 11 
Lactobacillus reuteri (L. reuteri) was shown to improve intestinal disorders not only by regulating gut microbiota and its metabolism but also by protecting the gut barrier, suppressing inflammation and immune responses, and inhibiting oxidative stress. 12 , 13 , 14 Gut microbiota release membrane vesicles (MVs), which contain various nucleic acids and proteins, 15 , 16 , 17 facilitating intercellular communication, particularly between bacteria and the host immune system. 18 Accumulating evidence indicates that probiotic-derived MVs exhibit effects similar to their parent bacteria and can overcome the potential risks associated with using live probiotics in immunocompromised individuals. 19 , 20 Both Clostridium butyricum (C. butyricum) 21 and its derived MVs have been proven effective in attenuating colitis. 22 Negatively charged MVs can readily penetrate the mucus layer and reach inflamed areas in the intestines through electrostatic interactions. 23 Additionally, MVs from probiotics can be produced on a large scale due to the rapid reproduction rate of bacteria. 24 However, the cargo molecules carried by MVs vary depending on environmental factors. For instance, the protein profiles of probiotic-derived MVs differ significantly under varying culture pH conditions. 25 Cross-feeding involving the sharing of metabolites between co-cultured 26 , 27 or naturally mixed gut microbes 28 might be facilitated by vesicle-mediated communications. This raises the possibility that co-culturing multiple probiotic strains could yield MVs with distinct and potently enhanced functionalities compared with those derived from single strains. Apart from intestinal flora imbalance, oxidative stress within the inflammatory bowel is regarded as another major factor contributing to the development of IBD. 29 , 30 Mounting evidence indicates that natural flavonoids, such as quercetin, 31 luteolin (Lut), 32 and apigenin, 33 exhibit anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities to alleviate IBD symptoms. Lut was reported to alleviate colitis in mice by suppressing macrophage activation and chemotaxis 34 and via the HMGB1-TLR-NF-κB signaling pathway. 35 However, its application is hindered by poor chemical stability and solubility. Various drug delivery systems, including polymers and biological particles, have been developed to address these limitations. 36 , 37 , 38 Among these, biological particles such as probiotic-derived MVs offer distinct advantages over synthetic systems, including inherent biodegradability, cost-effectiveness, low immunogenicity, and the capacity to penetrate physiological barriers. 24 , 39 , 40 Given that the cargo and biological effects of MVs from mixed strains might be shaped by inter-species interactions, in the current study, we first evaluated the cross-feeding relationship among B. longum, C. butyricum, and L. reuteri, each of which has been shown to alleviate IBD. 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 21 These probiotics were then co-cultured to produce mixed-species membrane vesicles (M-MVs). Their characteristics, including particle size, morphology, and protein composition, were further studied and compared with those of MVs derived from the corresponding single strains (B-MVs, C-MVs, and L-MVs). M-MVs displayed superior free radical scavenging ability, likely attributable to their characteristic cargo proteins. This distinct protein profile may arise from cross-feeding interactions during co-cultivation, wherein nutrient exchange and inter-species signaling modulate bacterial metabolism and gene expression, reshaping bacterial proteomes and inducing proteins absent in mono-cultures. 41 , 42 To further enhance therapeutic potential, we loaded M-MVs with luteolin (Lut-MVs) and evaluated their particle characteristics, cytotoxicity, and cellular uptake. Unlike synthetic carriers or single-strain MVs, our multi-species co-culture vesicles leverage bacterial cross-feeding to produce MVs with a distinct protein profile and enhanced functionality, while maintaining inherent biocompatibility and bioactivity. By integrating the intrinsic activity of M-MVs with the pharmacological effects of luteolin (Lut), Lut-MVs function synergistically to improve intestinal barrier function and alleviate oxidative damage and inflammation in colitis, positioning them as promising broad-spectrum agents for treating intestinal diseases. Results Preparation and characterization of M-MVs from co-cultured strains In this study, we cultured each individual strain of the above-mentioned probiotics (B. longum, C. butyricum, and L. reuteri) individually or co-cultured them. Subsequently, MVs derived from co-cultured probiotics were further examined compared with those derived from mono-cultured strains. We initially explored the mutual interactions among the three strains. As depicted in Figure 1 A, viable cell counts in the co-cultured strains increased significantly, particularly for the three-strain co-culture, which was 2- to 3-times higher than that of mono-cultures, indicating no antagonistic effects among these strains. Additionally, viable cell counts also increased in mono-cultures supplemented with the cell-free supernatants (CFS) from the other two strains ( Figure 1 B). This could be attributed to a cross-feeding relationship. 43 The growth of these strains, especially L. reuteri ( Figure 1 B), was significantly enhanced by the metabolites from the other strains. Figure 1 Preparation and characterization of membrane vesicles (A) Comparison of viable cell counts between mono-cultured and co-cultured strains. (B) Comparison of viable cell counts between mono-cultured strains alone and those supplemented with the cell-free supernatants (CFS) from other strains. (C) Schematic illustration of mixed-strain-derived membrane vesicles (M-MVs). (D–G) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images and dynamic light scattering (DLS) analysis of MVs: (D) B-MVs derived from B. longum, (E) C-MVs from C. butyricum, (F) L-MVs from L. reuteri, and (G) M-MVs. Scale bars, 100 nm. (H) SDS-PAGE analysis of proteins in MVs. (I) Venn diagram analysis of proteins in MVs. (J) ABTS free radical scavenging ability. (K) DPPH free radical scavenging ability. The data were obtained from 3 independent biological replicates and are represented as mean ± SD. Statistical comparisons among groups were performed using either ordinary one-way ANOVA or two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, as appropriate. Significant differences (p < 0.05) are indicated by different lowercase letters (a, b, c, and d), whereas groups sharing the same letter are not significantly different from each other. Exact p values are provided in Table S1 . From the supernatant of the co-cultured three strains, we isolated M-MVs by ultracentrifugation ( Figure 1 C) and further compared them with MVs (B-MVs, C-MVs, and L-MVs) derived from the mono-cultured strains including B. longum, C. butyricum, and L. reuteri, respectively. The morphology and particle sizes of MVs were analyzed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and dynamic light scattering (DLS). All MVs exhibited typical spherical vesicle morphology ( Figures 1 D–1G). The median particle size of M-MVs was approximately 190 nm, larger than those of other MVs ( Figure 1 G). The particle sizes of B-MVs, C-MVs, and L-MVs are in the nanoscale, consistent with those reported by several groups previously. 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 The protein composition profiles of MVs were determined by SDS-PAGE and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). As shown in the SDS-PAGE ( Figure 1 H), the protein size distribution of M-MVs was broad, ranging from 10 to 100 kDa, similar to those of B-MVs and C-MVs, while L-MVs had fewer proteins, confined to 30–50 kDa range. LC-MS/MS analysis showed a similar trend, with 200, 198, and 208 proteins detected in M-MVs, B-MVs, and C-MVs, respectively, while only 157 proteins were detected in L-MVs. As shown in the Venn diagram ( Figure 1 I), 144 proteins were shared among all four types of MVs, 4 unique proteins were detected only in M-MVs and B-MVs, and 1 unique protein was detected in C-MVs and L-MVs. These shared proteins were associated with biological processes, molecular function, and cellular components, as shown in Gene Ontology (GO) analysis ( Figure S1 ). All MVs had specific proteins involved in protein translation, whereas only M-MVs contained methionine sulfoxide reductase (MsrA) ( Table 1 ), which plays a crucial role in protecting against oxidative damage. 48 , 49 Table 1 Unique proteins identified in designated MVs analyzed by LC-MS/MS Protein Protein description B-MVs A0A073JNT2 putative tRNA (cytidine(34)-2′-O)-methyltransferase A0A2S7F653 elongation factor G A0A2S7FE99 large ribosomal subunit assembly factor BipA B3DQ32 carbamoyl phosphate synthase large chain C-MVs A0A073JR89 ribonucleoside-triphosphate reductase L-MVs A0A0A1GP60 transcriptional regulator M-MVs A0A2N0SYH4 uncharacterized protein A5VKT1 peptide methionine sulfoxide reductase MsrA B3DQC4 large ribosomal subunit protein uL14 Q9Z6C9 ATP-dependent RNA helicase CshA To evaluate the antioxidant activities of MVs, 1,1′-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) and 2,2′-azinobis-3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6- sulphonate (ABTS) scavenging assays were conducted in this study. As shown in Figures 1 J, 1K, 2 J, and 2K, all MVs demonstrated concentration-dependent antioxidant activities. Notably, M-MVs at 0.4 mg/mL showed the highest DPPH scavenging activity (65%), compared with 30%–40% for other MVs at the same concentration, likely due to the presence of MsrA. In the ABTS assay, M-MVs and L-MVs at 0.4 mg/mL demonstrated higher radical-scavenging activities (46% and 52%) than C-MVs and B-MVs (35% and 29%). Overall, M-MVs derived from co-cultured strains exhibit superior antioxidant ability compared with MVs from mono-cultured strains, when tested by utilizing our in vitro experimental approaches. Figure 2 Characterization of luteolin-loaded M-MVs (A) Solubility. (B and C) TEM images of M-MVs (B) and Lut-MVs (C), scale bars, 100 nm. (D and E) Size distribution of M-MVs (D) and Lut-MVs (E). (F) UV-vis absorption spectra. (G) Co-localization of Nile Red and MVs in Nile-red-loaded MVs: MVs were labeled with DiO membrane dye, while Lut was replaced by Nile red. Scale bars, 20 μm. (H and I) Stability of Lut-MVs and free Lut under simulated gastrointestinal (H) and intestinal conditions (I) in vitro. (J) ABTS free radical scavenging activity. (K) DPPH free radical scavenging capacity. The data were obtained from 3 independent biological replicates and are represented as the mean ± SD. Statistical comparisons among groups were performed using ordinary two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Significant differences (p < 0.05) are indicated by different lowercase letters (a, b, and c), whereas groups sharing the same letter are not significantly different from each other. Exact p values are provided in Table S2 . Characterization, gastrointestinal stability, and antioxidant activity of Lut-MVs We then explored the potential of M-MVs as a delivery system. Lut, a flavonoid with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, was loaded into M-MVs via ultrasonic treatment and designated as Lut-MVs. 50 As expected, Lut-MVs exhibited higher water solubility than free Lut ( Figure 2 A), similar to previous observations in which fucoxanthin-loaded MVs dissolved more effectively than free fucoxanthin. 51 , 52 TEM images showed no significant changes in the morphology of Lut-MVs compared with M-MVs ( Figures 2 B and 2C). DLS analysis indicated a slight increase in vesicle size for Lut-MVs (220 nm) compared with M-MVs (190 nm) ( Figures 2 D and 2E). To confirm the successful encapsulation of Lut into M-MVs, UV-vis absorption spectrophotometry and fluorescence microscopy were employed. UV absorption curves ( Figure 2 F) revealed peaks at 280 nm for the empty M-MVs and at 350 nm for free Lut, while Lut-MVs exhibited both peaks at 280 nm and 350 nm, indicating that Lut was indeed loaded into M-MVs. In the fluorescence microscopy analysis, Lut was substituted by the hydrophobic fluorescent dye Nile Red, while M-MVs were labeled with green membrane dye DiO. Figure 2 G displayed the merged signals (yellow) of Nile Red and M-MVs, confirming their successful combination. Additionally, the Lut-loading capacity of M-MVs reached 58%, comparable to a previous report. 53 The encapsulation of Lut within M-MVs not only enhanced its water solubility but also improved its gastrointestinal stability. After 3 h of gastric digestion, the retention rates of Lut were 78.3% for free Lut and 91.6% for Lut-MVs ( Figure 2 H). In the simulated intestinal fluid ( Figure 2 I), the relative content of free Lut rapidly decreased to 77.5% within 1 h and further declined to 52.2% after 6 h, while Lut-MVs maintained a high content of Lut (exceeding 90%) for 6 h. These findings align with previous studies, 53 , 54 suggesting that probiotic-derived MVs provide a protective interface layer against degradation by pepsin. Lut has been reported to exhibit significant scavenging properties against superoxide radicals. 55 , 56 In the present study, in addition to evaluating the solubility and stability, we focused on the antioxidant activity of Lut encapsulated within M-MVs. DPPH ( Figure 2 J) and ABTS ( Figure 2 K) scavenging assays indicated that, free Lut exhibited more pronounced antioxidant capacity than M-MVs across all tested concentrations, while Lut-MVs demonstrated antioxidant activity comparable to that of free Lut. In conclusion, Lut-MVs display superior antioxidant activity compared to M-MVs, warranting further investigation. Cytotoxicity and cellular uptake of Lut-MVs High biocompatibility and efficient cellular uptake are essential for an oral drug to achieve its therapeutic efficacy. In this study, the biocompatibility and cellular uptake of Lut-MVs were evaluated using the macrophage cell line RAW264.7. Biocompatibility was assessed through a CCK8 assay. The results indicated that M-MVs did not show significant cytotoxicity at concentrations below 100 μg/mL, and cell viability was slightly decreased but remained above 80% when the concentration was increased to 200 μg/mL ( Figure 3 A). Similarly, B-MVs, C-MVs, and L-MVs derived from the mono-cultured strains did not impact cell viability (>80%) ( Figures S2 A–S2C). Lut-MVs ( Figure 3 B) at the concentrations up to 200 μg/mL did not affect cell viability, maintaining it above 85%. Figure 3 Cytotoxicity and cellular uptake of M-MVs and Lut-MVs (A and B) Relative viabilities of RAW 264.7 cells after incubation with different concentrations of M-MVs and Lut-MVs for 24 h. The data were obtained from 3 independent biological replicates and are represented as the mean ± SD. Statistical comparisons among groups were performed using ordinary one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Significant differences (p < 0.05) are indicated by different lowercase letters (a, b, and c) within each column, whereas groups sharing the same letter are not significantly different from each other. Exact p values are provided in Table S3 . (C) Fluorescence microscope images showing uptake of MVs and Nild-red-loaded MVs by RAW264.7. Scale bars, 100 μm. To track the distribution of Lut-MVs within RAW264.7 cells, Lut was replaced by Nile Red, and MVs were labeled with green fluorescent dye DiO. As shown in Figure 3 C, macrophages treated with M-MVs exhibited clear DiO signals, while those treated with Nile Red-loaded M-MVs displayed merged yellow signals, indicating successful internalization of both empty and Nile Red-loaded M-MVs by the macrophages. Consistent with these findings, cells treated with B-MVs, C-MVs, and L-MVs also exhibited obvious green fluorescence signals ( Figures S2 D–S2F). Given that the encapsulation of Lut does not alter the surface properties of M-MVs, it is reasonable to infer that Lut-MVs could also be efficiently internalized by macrophages. The preventative effect of Lut-MVs in DSS-induced IBD mice Inspired by the excellent gastrointestinal stability and antioxidant activity of Lut-MVs in vitro, as well as their high biocompatibility and efficient cellular uptake, we hypothesized that Lut-MVs could serve as an ideal therapeutic agent for colitis. In the DSS-induced IBD mouse model ( Figure 4 A), we evaluated the preventive efficacy of Lut-MVs in comparison to Lut and other MVs. At the end of the experiment, no mortality was observed in the normal control (NC), M-MVs, and Lut-MVs groups, whereas the survival rate of mice in the DSS and Lut groups significantly decreased ( Figure S3 ). During the experiment, mice in the NC group consistently gained weight, while those in the DSS-treated group had a dramatic decrease in body weight. Intervention with Lut, M-MVs, and particularly Lut-MVs, mitigated body weight loss to varying degrees ( Figure 4 B). Furthermore, mice in the DSS-treated groups exhibited anal bleeding and an elevated disease activity index (DAI) score. As expected, the DAI scores were lower in the Lut, M-MVs, and Lut-MVs groups compared with the DSS-only group, with the Lut-MVs group showing the lowest DAI score among all experimental groups ( Figure 4 C). Figure 4 Preventive effects of Lut, M-MVs, and Lut-MVs in DSS-induced IBD mice (A) Experimental design for mouse study. Mice in the experimental groups received daily oral administrations of 2 mg/kg of the respective MVs or Lut for 3 weeks. Colitis was induced by administering 3% DSS from week 2 to week 3. (B) Changes in body weight in each group. (C) Disease activity index (DAI) scores following DSS treatment. (D) Representative photographs of the colons from different groups. (E) Colon length measurements from each group. (F) Colonic mucosal damage index (CMDI) score following DSS treatment. The results are represented as the mean ± SD (n = 3–5), and statistical comparisons among groups were performed using ordinary one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Significant differences (p < 0.05) are indicated by different lowercase letters (a, b, and c), whereas groups sharing the same letter are not significantly different from each other. Exact p values are provided in Table S4 . (G) H&E staining images of the intestinal tissues under different treatments. Black arrows indicate crypt loss, black triangles indicate inflammatory cell infiltration, and red lines indicate the mucosal layer. (Scale bars, 500 μm). Colon atrophy, mainly attributed to dehydration, mucosal disruption, and colonic epithelial damage, is another critical parameter for evaluating the severity of IBD. In the current study, DSS treatment typically induced colonic shortening and an increased colonic mucosal damage index (CMDI), compared with the NC group. However, Lut-MVs and M-MVs significantly alleviated colon shortening and CMDI ( Figures 4 D–4F) induced by DSS. In comparison with B-MVs, C-MVs, and L-MVs, M-MVs exhibited a more pronounced effect in DSS-induced IBD mice ( Figure S4 ). However, the Lut group exhibited limited efficacy ( Figures 4 B–4F), which may be attributed to the lower dose of Lut administered in our study. To further assess the efficacy of the Lut-MVs at the histological level, H&E staining of mouse colon tissue was performed. As shown in Figure 4 G, the crypt-villus architecture of the colon tissue in the NC group remained intact, whereas the DSS group displayed severe pathological changes, including thickened colonic walls, disordered villi, crypt loss, and extensive inflammatory cell infiltration. In the M-MVs and Lut groups, partial recovery was observed, and the Lut-MVs group demonstrated the most significant improvement in the colonic structural integrity. In addition, treatment with Lut-MVs, M-MVs, or Lut exhibited a favorable biosafety profile in major tissues ( Figure 5 ) and prevented the DSS-induced enlargement of the spleen ( Figure S5 ). Figure 5 Biosafety of M-MVs, Lut, and Lut-MVs in vivo in histopathological analysis of main tissues after different treatments Scale bars, 200 μm. Repair effect of Lut-MVs on the intestinal mucosal barrier in IBD mice As the first physical barrier, the intestinal mucosal layer plays a critical role in defending against external factors, and goblet cells are essential for maintaining its integrity. 57 , 58 To investigate the repairing effects of Lut-MVs on the intestinal mucosal barrier, we performed periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and Alcian blue-PAS (AB-PAS) staining. The results demonstrated that the NC group exhibited a uniformly thick mucosal layer with abundant reddish-purple-stained goblet cells ( Figure 6 A) and blue-purple mucoproteins ( Figure 6 B). In contrast, the DSS group showed a significant reduction in both goblet cells and mucoproteins, accompanied by disruption of the mucus layer. Treatment with M-MVs, Lut, and particularly Lut-MVs, significantly increased the numbers of goblet cells and mucoproteins ( Figures 6 A and 6B; Figure S6 ), indicating substantial improvement in repairing the damaged mucosal layer. Figure 6 Repairing effects of Lut, M-MVs, and Lut-MVs on the intestinal mucosal barrier in DSS-induced IBD mice (A and B) Representative images of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stained colon sections (A) and Alcian blue-PAS (AB-PAS)-stained colon sections (B). (C–E) Immunofluorescence staining of MUC2 (C), ZO-1 (D), and Occludin (E), scale bars, 100 μm. (F–H) Quantitative analysis of fluorescence intensity for MUC2 (F), ZO-1 (G), and Occludin (H). (I–K) mRNA expression levels of MUC2 (I), ZO-1 (J), and Occludin (K) in the colon tissues from mice in different treatment groups. The data were obtained from 3 independent biological replicates and are represented as the mean ± SD. Statistical comparisons among groups were performed using ordinary one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Significant differences (p < 0.05) are indicated by different lowercase letters (a, b, c, and d), whereas groups sharing the same letter are not significantly different from each other. Exact p values are provided in Table S5 . MUC2 is a secretory mucoprotein produced by goblet cells and plays a critical role in protecting the mucosal layer. 59 Fluorescence analysis revealed that DSS treatment significantly reduced MUC2 levels in colon tissues, whereas M-MVs, Lut, and Lut-MVs markedly prevented this reduction ( Figures 6 C and 6F). This observation was further supported by RT-qPCR analysis of the gene that encodes MUC2 ( Figure 6 I). The tight junction proteins, including ZO-1 and Occludin, are two crucial markers for maintaining epithelial barrier integrity. 60 , 61 Our immunofluorescence and RT-qPCR analyses indicated that both ZO-1 and Occludin levels were significantly decreased in the DSS-induced IBD model, while this effect was notably mitigated in the M-MVs, Lut, and particularly Lut-MVs groups ( Figures 6 D–6K). In comparison with B-MVs, C-MVs, and L-MVs, M-MVs exhibited a more pronounced repairing effect in IBD mice by significantly increasing the levels of MUC2, ZO-1, and Occludin ( Figures S7 and S8 ). Based on these findings, we suggest that Lut-MVs may effectively alleviate IBD by enhancing the integrity of the intestinal mucosal barrier. Effects of Lut-MVs on antioxidation and anti-inflammation in the IBD mouse model Oxidative stress, characterized by excessive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), is considered to play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of IBD. 62 
In vitro studies have shown that Lut and Lut-MVs possess great ROS scavenging capacity ( Figures 2 J and 2K). Therefore, we evaluated the levels of antioxidative indicators, including myeloperoxidase (MPO), catalase (CAT), superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione (GSH), malondialdehyde (MDA), and nitric oxide (NO) in intestinal tissue from IBD mice after different treatments. As shown in Figure 7 , compared with the NC group, the DSS group exhibited decreased activities of antioxidant enzymes (CAT and SOD) and the non-enzymatic antioxidant GSH, while MPO activity was significantly increased, and there was an accumulation of excess MDA and NO. Treatment with M-MVs, Lut, and particularly Lut-MVs, significantly alleviated these changes in antioxidative indicators ( Figures 7 A–7F). Compared with B-MVs, C-MVs, and L-MVs, M-MVs, which contain characteristic antioxidant proteins, exhibited a superior antioxidant effect in IBD mice ( Figures S9 A–S9F). Figure 7 Effects of Lut, M-MVs, and Lut-MVs on the antioxidant capacity and inflammatory cytokine release in DSS-induced IBD mice (A–F) Concentrations of MPO (A), CAT (B), SOD (C), GSH (D), MDA (E), and NO (F) in the colon. (G–I) Levels of TNF-α (G), IL-6 (H), and IL-10 (I) in serum. The data were obtained from 3 independent biological replicates and are represented as the mean ± SD. Statistical comparisons among groups were performed using ordinary one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Significant differences (p < 0.05) are indicated by different lowercase letters (a, b, c, d, and e) within each column, whereas groups sharing the same letter are not significantly different from each other. Exact p values are provided in Table S6 . ROS can trigger the release of pro-inflammatory factors, which can disrupt intestinal mucosal metabolism and compromise the immune barrier. 63 , 64 , 65 In the DSS group, the expression levels of pro-inflammatory factors TNF-α and IL-6 were significantly higher than those in the NC group ( Figures 7 G and 7H). Treatment with M-MVs, Lut, and especially Lut-MVs, significantly reduced the levels of TNF-α and IL-6. Additionally, DSS treatment did not significantly affect the expression levels of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, whereas treatment with M-MVs and Lut-MVs markedly increased its expression ( Figure 7 I). In summary, these findings suggest that Lut-MVs, with their antioxidant capacities, effectively mitigate inflammation in the IBD mouse model by enhancing the antioxidant capacity of tissues. Effects of Lut-MVs on intestinal flora regulation in IBD mice Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that dysbiosis of the gut microbiota is a key contributor to IBD. 66 , 67 Therefore, we investigated whether Lut-MVs could modulate gut microbial homeostasis in IBD mice through 16s rRNA sequencing analysis. The Venn diagram revealed that the unique operational taxonomic unit (OTU) numbers of intestinal flora in the NC, DSS, M-MVs, Lut, and Lut-MVs groups were 430, 641, 501, 376, and 321, respectively ( Figure 8 A), indicating that DSS treatment enhanced the diversity of the bacterial flora. The phylum level annotation of OTUs in each sample indicated that the dominant bacteria were Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Campylobacterota, and Desulfobacterota, accounting for over 95% of the total abundance across all five groups ( Figure 8 B). Compared with the NC group, DSS treatment significantly reduced the abundance of Bacteroidota, increased the abundance of Firmicutes and Proteobacteria and raised the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes (F/B) ratio ( Figures 8 B–8D). These findings are consistent with previous research, which has shown that the abnormal abundance of Proteobacteria is associated with dysbiosis in the gut microbiota 68 and that an increased F/B ratio is implicated in intestinal inflammation. 69 At the family level, there were notable increases in the abundances of harmful bacteria in the DSS group, including Desulfovibrionaceae and Enterobacteriaceae (belonging to the phylum Proteobacteria), Marinifilaceae, and Erysipelatoclostridiaceae ( Figure 8 E), which have been reported to be associated with colon diseases. 69 , 70 , 71 Additionally, Oscillospiraceae, which is positively associated with leanness, 72 exhibited relatively high abundance ( Figure 8 E), potentially accounting for the significant weight loss observed in the DSS group. However, these phenomena were reversed upon treatment with M-MVs, Lut, and especially Lut-MVs ( Figures 8 C–8E). Similarly, treatments with C-MVs and L-MVs also reduced the F/B ratio, while B-MVs treatment notably decreased Proteobacteria abundance ( Figure S10 ). Compared with the DSS group, Lut-MVs treatment not only reduced the abundance of the aforementioned harmful bacteria but also enhanced the richness of butyrate-producing gut bacteria, including Butyricicoccacea and UCG-010 at the family level ( Figure 8 E), as well as Bacteroides and Ruminococcus at both the family and genus levels ( Figures 8 E–8G) and Blautia and Lachnospiraceae at the genus level ( Figures 8 F and 8H). Bacteroides has been reported to regulate intestinal homeostasis and modulate intestinal bile acid metabolism in animals. 73 
Blautia and Lachnospiraceae have been shown to stimulate mucus growth through the production of the short-chain fatty acids to alleviate DSS-induced acute colitis. 74 , 75 
Blautia has been identified as a key genus in relieving colitis, as it produces bacteriocins that prevent pathogen colonization. 76 M-MVs and Lut treatments also increased the richness of Bacteroides and Blautia genera ( Figures 8 F–8H). Figure 8 Effect of Lut, M-MVs, and Lut-MVs treatment on regulating the intestinal flora in DSS-induced IBD mice (A) Venn diagram of OTUs among five groups. (B) Relative abundance of gut microorganisms classified by phylum-level taxonomy. (C) Ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroides. (D) Relative abundance of Proteobacteria in the intestine. (E) Heatmap of the relative abundance of the microbiome at the family level for each group. (F) Comparison of the relative abundance of the top 10 gut microorganisms classified at the genus level. (G and H) The taxa exhibiting significant differences in the abundance of Bacteroides (G) and Blautia (H) at the genus level. Different letters in a column indicate significant differences (p < 0.05). The data were obtained from 3 independent biological replicates and are represented as the mean ± SD. Statistical comparisons among groups were performed using an unpaired ordinary one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Significant differences (p < 0.05) are indicated by different lowercase letters (a, b, and c) within each column, whereas groups sharing the same letter are not significantly different from each other. Exact p values are provided in Table S7 . (I) Spearman correlation analysis between the intestinal microbiota and IBD-related metabolic parameters in response to oral Lut-MVs. Red color denotes a positive correlation, while blue color denotes a negative correlation. The intensity of the color is proportional to the strength of the Spearman correlation. To further investigate the consequences of the altered gut microbiota composition in the Lut-MVs group, Spearman correlations were conducted between altered microbes and IBD-related factors. As shown in Figure 8 I, the abundance of Proteobacteria (at the phylum level) was significantly negatively correlated with the antioxidant levels (CAT, GSH, and SOD), the anti-inflammatory factor IL-10, and the mucosal barrier protection protein ZO-1, but positively correlated with the inflammatory factor TNF-α. In contrast, the enrichment of the beneficial UCG-010 in the colon presented the opposite trend. Moreover, the abundance of the harmful bacteria, including Desulfovibrionaceae and Enterobacteriaceae, was significantly positively correlated with the accumulation of pro-oxidant factors (MPO and MDA) and the inflammatory factor IL-6 level, but negatively correlated with the expression level of the mucosal barrier-related protein MUC2. However, the beneficial gut bacteria, such as Bacteroides, Blautia, Lachnospiraceae, and Ruminococcus, exhibited the opposite correlation with these factors. These findings indicated that Lut-MVs treatment induces an increase in beneficial bacteria, including Ruminococcaceae, UCG-010, Butyricicoccaceae, Bacteroides, Blautia, Lachnospiraceae_NK4A136_group, and Ruminococcus_torques_group, and the decrease in harmful bacteria, including Proteobacteria, Enterobacteriaceae, Desulfovibrionaceae, Marinifilaceae, and Erysipelatoclostridiaceae. This contributes to the anti-inflammatory and antioxidant state as well as to the integrity of the intestinal mucosal barrier and further protects against the DSS-induced damage in the colon. Discussion In this study, we developed Lut-MVs by encapsulating Lut into M-MVs. Lut-MVs significantly alleviated DSS-induced colitis in mice by improving intestinal barrier integrity, alleviating oxidative stress, and modulating inflammatory responses, exhibiting superior efficacy compared with free Lut or blank M-MVs. The enhanced intestinal barrier restoration conferred by Lut-MVs may involve the synergistic function of Lut and M-MVs. Lut has been reported to directly reinforce epithelial barrier function through the MAPK/NF-κB/MLCK and Nrf2 signaling pathways, 77 as well as by restoring the balance of ILC3 subsets to promote intestinal barrier repair. 78 Meanwhile, emerging evidence indicates that probiotic-derived vesicles can directly modulate tight junction expression. 79 , 80 For instance, MVs derived from Limosilactobacillus reuteri have been reported to be taken up by intestinal epithelial cells, leading to elevated expression of ZO-1, E-cadherin (Cdh1), and Occludin; reduced intestinal permeability; and protective effects on epithelial tight junction functionality. 80 Consistently, in our study, M-MVs alone also enhanced the expression of tight junction proteins, as evidenced by increased levels of MUC2, ZO-1, and Occludin ( Figures 6 I–6K). Based on these findings, Lut-MVs integrate the direct transcriptional effects of Lut with the intrinsic barrier-protective properties of M-MVs. This dual action likely results in synergistic enhancement of tight junction gene expression, achieving greater efficacy than either component alone, which is consistent with our experimental observations. In conclusion, we developed a novel method for preparing M-MVs with enhanced antioxidant properties and successfully loaded Lut to generate Lut-MVs. Lut-MVs exhibited improved solubility, stability, and therapeutic efficacy in a colitis model, alleviating intestinal barrier dysfunction, oxidative stress, and inflammation while modulating gut microbiota. This study establishes a novel strategy for preparing multi-species probiotic-derived vesicles and validates Lut-MVs as a promising platform for hydrophobic drug delivery in the treatment of colonic diseases. Limitations of the study Despite these promising findings, several limitations must be acknowledged. First, our study remains primarily descriptive, particularly regarding the mechanistic contribution of MsrA. While proteomic analysis identified MsrA as a protein uniquely enriched in M-MVs, and its known antioxidant function aligns with the observed phenotypic effects, we did not perform direct functional validation to establish causality, such as MsrA knockout or inhibition. Future studies employing genetic ablation of MsrA in probiotic strains and a comparative evaluation of MsrA-deficient vesicles in colitis models will be essential to determine whether MsrA plays a critical role in the observed therapeutic effects. Second, the study lacks in vivo biodistribution data to confirm intestinal uptake and systemic exposure of Lut-MVs. Although prior reports indicate that bacterial extracellular vesicles can be internalized by intestinal epithelial cells via endocytosis and traverse polarized epithelial monolayers via transcytosis, 81 , 82 we did not experimentally track the fate of Lut-MVs in host tissues. Direct in vivo imaging would provide more definitive evidence regarding their interaction with host cells and their potential function as bioactive participants in host-microbiota crosstalk. Future studies employing fluorescently labeled vesicles will be necessary to address this gap. Third, the safety evaluation of Lut-MVs remains incomplete. Although no histopathological abnormalities in major organs or adverse effects on body weight and general behavior were observed, these assessments were limited to basic histological examination as a secondary endpoint. While our short-term safety assessment showed no obvious toxicity, long-term safety remains to be investigated. A comprehensive safety evaluation, including blood biochemistry, hematological parameters, and absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) profiling is essential for clinical translation and will be incorporated in future studies. Additionally, the translational relevance of our findings is constrained by the use of the DSS-induced colitis model. While widely employed for studying acute intestinal inflammation, this model does not fully recapitulate the chronic, relapsing nature of human IBD. Dose optimization, long-term safety, and potential immunogenicity associated with repeated Lut-MV administration also warrant further investigation in more clinically relevant models. Resource availability Lead contact Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Shulin Hou ( hou_shulin1@163.com ). Materials availability This study did not generate new unique reagents. Data and code availability 
 • The MS proteomics data have been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium: http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset?ID=PXD071787 via the iProX partner repository: https://www.iprox.cn/page/project.html?id=IPX0014605000 . 83 The raw 16S rDNA sequencing data have been deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under BioProject accession: PRJNA1482721. Both standardized datasets are publicly available as of the publication date. • This study does not report original algorithms. • Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request. 
 Acknowledgments This work was funded by Shanxi Basic Research Program ( 202103021224236 and 20210302123315 ), Shanxi Key Subjects Construction (FSKSC), and Shanxi Key Laboratory Open Project (no. CPSY 202204 ). Author contributions All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript. S.H., H.Y., Q.W., X.Z., R.L., and H.H. performed the experiment. L.W., T.Z., Q.S., Y.S., and Z.L. supervised the experiment. S.H. and H.Y. wrote and edited the manuscript. J.X., T.J., and Z.L. reviewed and edited the manuscript. Declaration of interests A patent application (application no. 202410929420.1, pending) covering the multi-species probiotics loaded with luteolin (Lut-MVs) described in this manuscript has been filed by Shanxi Medical University. The inventors include S.H., H.Y., J.X., T.Z., Z.L., H.Z., Y.S., L.W., and Z.M., not all of whom are co-authors of this article. STAR★Methods Key resources table 
 REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Bacterial and virus strains B. longum CICC25033 China Center of Industrial Culture Collection (Beijing, China) CICC25033 C. butyricum CICC23847 China Center of Industrial Culture Collection (Beijing, China) CICC23847 L. reuteri CICC6131 China Center of Industrial Culture Collection (Beijing, China) CICC6131 Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins Luteolin Beyotime Biotechnology Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China) SM2045-25 mg Dextran sulfate sodium (DSS, purity of 98%, molecular weight 36–50 kDa) MP Biomedicals, LLC (California, USA) 0216011080∗ Critical commercial assays Myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity commercial kit Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Co., Ltd. (Nanjing, China) A044-1-1 Superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity commercial kit Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Co., Ltd. (Nanjing, China) A001-3-2 Catalase (CAT) activity commercial kit Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Co., Ltd. (Nanjing, China) A007-1-1 Malondialdehyde (MDA) commercial kit Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Co., Ltd. (Nanjing, China) A003-1-2 Glutathione (GSH) commercial kit Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Co., Ltd. (Nanjing, China) A006-2-1 Nitric oxide (NO) commercial kit Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Co., Ltd. (Nanjing, China) A013-2-1 Mouse interleukin-6 (IL-6) ELISA kit Solarbio Science & Technology Co., Ltd (Beijing, China) SEKM-0007 Mouse interleukin-10 (IL-10) ELISA kit Solarbio Science & Technology Co., Ltd (Beijing, China) SEKM-0010 Mouse tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) ELISA kit Solarbio Science & Technology Co., Ltd (Beijing, China) SEKM-0034 Deposited data MS proteomics data https://www.iprox.cn/page/project.html?id=IPX0014605000 ProteomeXChange: PXD071787 (iProX: IPX0014605000) 16S rDNA sequencing data https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA1482721 BioProject: PRJNA1482721 Experimental models: Cell lines Mouse macrophage cell line RAW264.7 American Type Culture Collection and cultured in minimum essential medium (MEM) RRID: CVCL_0493 Experimental models: Organisms/strains Male mouse C57BL/6J Beijing Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd (Beijing, China) RRID: IMSR_JAX:000664 Oligonucleotides Primers for mouse GADPH mRNA: Forward: 5ʹ–CCACTCACGGCAAATTCAAC-3ʹ; Reverse: 5′–CTCCACGACATACTCAGCAC-3ʹ This paper N/A Primers for mouse ZO-1 mRNA: Forward: 5ʹ–ACCCGAAACTGATGCTGTGGATAG-3ʹ; Reverse: 5′–GCTGGCTGGCTGTACTGTGAG-3ʹ This paper N/A Primers for mouse Occludin mRNA: Forward: 5ʹ–CCTCTGACCTTGAGTGTGGATGAC-3ʹ; Reverse: 5′–TCCTCTTGCCCTTTCCTGCTTTC-3ʹ This paper N/A Primers for mouse MUC2 mRNA: Forward: 5ʹ–GCACATCACCTACCACATCATCAAC-3ʹ; Reverse: 5′–CCAGAATCCAGCCAGCCAGTC-3ʹ This paper N/A Software and algorithms Prism 9 GraphPad ( https://www.graphpad.com/ ) RRID: SCR_002798 R software The R Foundation ( https://www.r-project.org/ ) RRID: SCR_001905 
 Experimental model and study participant details Mouse models and husbandry C57BL/6J male mice (aged 6 weeks, body weight 20-23 g) utilized in this study were obtained from Beijing Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd (Beijing, China) and acclimatized for 7 days. Mice were housed under controlled conditions with free access to water and food, maintained at appropriate temperature and humidity levels. All animal experiments were conducted in strict compliance with guidelines approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Shanxi Medical University (approval no. 2024-112). This study used only male mice, so the potential influence of sex could not be assessed, and the findings may not be generalizable to females. Microbe strains The freeze-dried powders of B. longum CICC25033, C. butyricum CICC23847, and L. reuteri CICC6131 (obtained from China Center of Industrial Culture Collection (Beijing, China)) were resuscitated according to the manufacturer’s instructions. B. longum and L. reuteri were cultured anaerobically in MRS broth at 37 °C for 24 h, while C. butyricum was cultured under the same conditions with the addition of 0.1 mg/mL L-cysteine hydrochloride. Cell lines The monocyte-derived mouse macrophage cell line RAW264.7 was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and cultured in minimum essential medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100 μg/mL), and glutamine (2 mM) at 37 °C under 5% CO2. The cell line was authenticated by the depositor (ATCC), no additional authentication was performed in our laboratory. All experiments were conducted with cells at low passage numbers (passages <15). Mycoplasma contamination was regularly excluded by PCR assays as suggested previously, 84 and all tested batches were negative. Before stimulation, RAW264.7 cells were seeded in 6-well plates at a density of 4 × 105 cells/well and cultured overnight. Method details Inter-strain synergistic experiment Each probiotic strain, their pairwise combinations (1:1) and a three-strain combination (1:1:1) were inoculated at 1% into fresh MRS broth and incubated anaerobically at 37 °C for 24 h, respectively. Groups contained C. butyricum were supplemented with 0.1 mg/mL L-cysteine hydrochloride. Viable cells were determined using the plate counting method. 85 Each probiotic strain was cultured in MRS medium supplemented with 1% cell-free supernatant (CFS) from the other two strains, respectively. CFS was obtained by centrifugation (11,000×g, 4 °C, 10 min) after the probiotic strain was cultured for 24 h. To analyze their cross-feeding relationships, viable cell counts were compared between groups with and without added CFS using the plate counting method. Isolation of probiotic-derived MVs B. longum, C. butyricum, L. reuteri, and their three-strain combinations were cultured anaerobically in MRS medium at 37 °C for 24 h, respectively. Supernatants were collected by centrifugation (3000×g, 15 min). Membrane vesicles (MVs) were isolated through sequential centrifugation steps as described by Maroto and colleagues previously. 86 The supernatant was first centrifuged at 11,000×g for 30 min, then filtered through a 0.22 μm Millex-GP filter (Merck Millipore, Carrigtwohill, Ireland) to remove small cell debris. The filtrate was ultracentrifuged at 150,000×g for 90 min to obtain MV pellets. MVs were resuspended in sterile PBS and stored at -80 °C. Preparation of Lut-MVs The encapsulation of Lut was performed according to established methods. 53 , 87 Lut was dissolved in ethanol at 0.2 mg/mL and mixed with M-MVs (0.2 mg/mL, protein concentration) obtained from co-cultured three probiotics in a 1:1 volume ratio. The mixture was sonicated at 200W for 30 cycles (5 s on, 10 s off) in an ice bath, followed by incubation at 37 °C for 1 h. Unencapsulated luteolin in the mixtures was removed by ultrafiltration (Millipore, USA). The resulting luteolin-loaded M-MVs, designated as Lut-MVs, were concentrated by ultrafiltration to a final protein concentration of 0.2 mg/mL and stored at -80 °C until use. Characterization of MVs and Lut-MVs The morphology and particle size of samples were analyzed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM, H-7650, Hitachi, Japan) and dynamic light scattering (DLS, Nano ZS90, Malvern Instrument Co., Ltd., England), respectively. Ultraviolet–visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra were measured using a double-beam spectrophotometer (UH5300, Japan). The loading capacity (LC) of Lut-MVs was measured according to a previous literature by Liang et al. 53 Luteolin concentration was calculated based on the absorbance value at 350 nm using a microplate reader (Molecular Devices MT1000, China). 55 The BCA protein quantification kit (Solarbio) was employed to determine the protein concentration of Lut-MVs. The LC of Lut-MVs was calculated as follows: LC (%) = MLut/MMVs. Here, MLut is the mass of luteolin in Lut-MVs, and MMVs is the protein content of Lut-MVs. To investigate the co-localization of M-MVs with luteolin, M-MVs was labeled with the 3,3′-dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine perchlorate (DiO) fluorescent dye, and luteolin was substituted with the hydrophobic fluorescent dye Nile Red. The labeled samples were analyzed by fluorescence microscopy (ECLIPSE Ti2, Nikon, Japan). Proteomic analysis of MVs The protein levels of MVs were analyzed using the BCA protein quantification kit (Solarbio) and 10% SDS-PAGE. Protein qualitative analysis of MVs was performed by Applied Protein Technology (Shanghai, China) via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In vitro assessment of the antioxidant activity and stability of MVs In vitro antioxidant activity was evaluated using 2,2’-azinobis-3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6- sulphonate (ABTS) and 1,1’-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical-scavenging assays, as previously reported. 88 Lut-MVs, Lut, and other MVs were prepared at various concentrations. In a 96-well plate, 10 μL of each sample was added to wells, followed by 200 μL of ABTS working solution. After incubating at 30 °C for 6 min in the dark, the absorbance was measured at 734 nm. For the DPPH assay, 10 μL of each sample was mixed with 100 μL of DPPH solution in a 96-well plate. The reaction was carried out at 30 °C for 30 min in the dark, after which the absorbance was measured at 512 nm. The stability of samples was ascertained in artificial gastric and intestinal fluids. 1 mL Lut-MVs (Lut concentration: 0.15 mg/mL) and Lut (0.15 mg/mL) were respectively added into the artificial gastric or intestinal fluids (5 mL). Subsequently, these mixtures were placed in a shaking incubator (100×g) at 37 °C for a specific period. The Lut content was measured based on the absorbance value at 350 nm. Cytotoxicity and cellular uptake assay The cytotoxic effects were determined by CCK8 assay. RAW264.7 macrophages in the logarithmic growth phase were seeded in 96-well plates with a density of 1×105 cells per well and cultured in high-glucose DMEM medium with 5% CO2 at 37 °C for 24 h. After removing the supernatant, the cells were then treated with 100 μL fresh medium containing different concentrations of MVs for 24 h. Subsequently, the supernatant was replaced by 100 μL of new medium containing 10% CCK-8 reagent. After incubation for 1.5 h, the absorbance of each well was measured at 450 nm with a Microplate reader (BioTek, USA). To track the distribution of MVs in cells, MVs were labeled with fluorescent dye DiO. For Lut-MVs group, Lut was substituted by Nile Red. To determine the cellular uptake of MVs, RAW264.7 macrophages were seeded in 24-well plates at 1×105 cells per well, and co-cultured with fluorescent labeled MVs samples (500 uL of 1 mg/mL). After incubation for 24 h, a DAPI solution was added for nuclear staining for 10 min. Cell uptake was observed under a fluorescence microscope (ECLIPSE Ti2, Nikon). Animal experiments Mice were randomly assigned into five groups: (1) normal control (NC) group, (2) DSS group, (3) M-MVs group, (4) Lut group, and (5) Lut-MVs group. To assess the protective effect of Lut-MVs, mice in the M-MVs, Lut and Lut-MVs groups received daily oral administrations of 0.2 mL of M-MVs, Lut and Lut-MVs at a concentration of 0.2 mg/mL respectively, for 14 days. Mice in the NC and DSS groups were given 0.2 mL of sterile PBS as a control for 14 days. After 14 days, all experimental groups and the DSS group were provided with a 3% DSS (w/w) solution as drinking water for 7 days. Mice in the NC group were not treated with DSS. Daily observations and records were made regarding each mouse’s body weight, fur color, mental state, and fecal morphology. Additionally, daily mortality rates and disease activity index (DAI) scores were calculated for each group. DAI was calculated according to the literature. 89 After 21 days of the experiment, all mice were humanely euthanized. Serum samples were collected for ELISA analysis. The dissected colon length was measured, and the colonic mucosal damage index (CMDI) was calculated according to previously published methods. 90 Colon tissues were collected for antioxidant analysis, RNA extraction, histological examination and immunofluorescence studies. Major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) were also collected for histological analysis. For microbiota analysis, colon contents were transferred into enzyme-free tubes, immediately frozen using liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C. In vivo antioxidant activity of colon tissues The colon tissues in cold saline (w/v 1:10) were homogenized in a tissue grinder (KZ-II, Service-bio, China), and then the homogenate supernatant was collected by centrifugation (12000xg, 10 min). Subsequently, the relevant antioxidant indices of colon samples, including the activities of MPO, SOD and CAT, as well as the levels of MDA, GSH and NO were assayed following the manufacturer’s instructions. In vivo enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) analysis of colon tissues Blood samples were collected and allowed to clot at room temperature for 2 hours. Then, the serum samples were obtained by centrifugation at 4 °C, 3500×g for 10 minutes. The levels of cytokines IL-6, IL-10, and TNF-α in the serum were quantified by ELISA kit, following the provided instructions. Histological analysis and immunofluorescence The Swiss-roll of colon tissue, 91 heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney tissues were routinely fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight, and then embedded in a paraffin blocks. The embedded specimens were sectioned at a thickness of 4 μm, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for histological analysis. Colon sections were also stained with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) or incubated with antibodies to detect tight junction proteins (Occludin, ZO-1, MUC2) by immunofluorescence. RT-qPCR analysis of colon tissues Total RNA from the colon tissue was extracted using an RNA extraction kit (TransGen Biotech, Beijing, China). cDNA was obtained using a reverse transcription kit (abm, Canada). qPCR analysis was conducted using the abm BlasTaq™ 2X qPCR MasterMix and primers. Primer sequences for genes related to tight junction proteins are shown in the key resources table , including those that encode ZO-1, Occludin and MUC2. Analysis of gut microbiota The microbiota of mouse colon contents were analyzed by 16S rDNA sequencing (V3-V4). Total genomic DNA was extracted from the colon content samples. Subsequently, The V3–V4 amplicons of 16S rRNA was amplified using Phusion® High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix (New England Biolabs). PCR products were purified by magnetic beads. Sequencing libraries were generated on Illumina platforms (Novogene Genomics Technology Co. Ltd., Beijing, China). Gut microbiota composition, Venn diagram analysis, and species abundance analysis were performed on the cloud platform. Spearman correlation was analyzed by “ggplot2” and “pheatmap” packages of R software to evaluate the association between the gut microbiota and IBD-related metabolic parameters. Quantification and statistical analysis All experimental data were tested at least three times and presented as mean ± SD. Statistical analysis was performed by GraphPad Prism 9.0.0. Statistical comparisons among groups were performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) or two-way ANOVA was performed as appropriate, followed by multiple comparisons using the t-test to determine significant differences. A p-value below 0.05 was considered significant and marked with different letters, whereas groups sharing the same letter are not significantly different from each other. Descriptions of statistical analyses can also be found in figure legends. Exact p values are provided in the supplementary table. Raw data used in this manuscript is available from the authors on request. References 1 Shah S.C. Itzkowitz S.H. Colorectal Cancer in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Mechanisms and Management Gastroenterology 162 2022 715 730.e3 10.1053/j.gastro.2021.10.035 34757143 PMC9003896 2 Bray F. Ferlay J. Soerjomataram I. Siegel R.L. Torre L.A. Jemal A. Global cancer statistics 2018: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries CA Cancer J. Clin. 68 2018 394 424 10.3322/caac.21492 30207593 3 Dou Z. Zheng H. Shi Y. Li Y. Jia J. Analysis of global prevalence, DALY and trends of inflammatory bowel disease and their correlations with sociodemographic index: Data from 1990 to 2019 Autoimmun. Rev. 23 2024 103655 10.1016/j.autrev.2024.103655 39366514 4 Wu K. Liu Y.Y. Shao S. Song W. Chen X.H. Dong Y.T. Zhang Y.M. The microglial innate immune receptors TREM-1 and TREM-2 in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) drive visceral hypersensitivity and depressive-like behaviors following DSS-induced colitis Brain Behav. Immun. 112 2023 96 117 10.1016/j.bbi.2023.06.003 37286175 5 Carloni S. Bertocchi A. Mancinelli S. Bellini M. Erreni M. Borreca A. Braga D. Giugliano S. Mozzarelli A.M. Manganaro D. Identification of a choroid plexus vascular barrier closing during intestinal inflammation Science 374 2021 439 448 10.1126/science.abc6108 34672740 6 Le Berre C. Honap S. Peyrin-Biroulet L. Ulcerative colitis Lancet 402 2023 571 584 10.1016/s0140-6736(23)00966-2 37573077 7 Murray A. Nguyen T.M. Parker C.E. Feagan B.G. MacDonald J.K. Oral 5-aminosalicylic acid for induction of remission in ulcerative colitis Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2020 2020 128 10.1002/14651858.CD000543.pub5 PMC8189994 32786164 8 Marshall J.K. Thabane M. Steinhart A.H. Newman J.R. Anand A. Irvine E.J. Rectal 5-aminosalicylic acid for maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2012 2012 35 10.1002/14651858.CD004118.pub2 PMC11972843 23152224 9 Gionchetti P. Rizzello F. Annese V. Armuzzi A. Biancone L. Castiglione F. Comberlato M. Cottone M. Danese S. Daperno M. Use of corticosteroids and immunosuppressive drugs in inflammatory bowel disease: Clinical practice guidelines of the Italian Group for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease Dig. Liver Dis. 49 2017 604 617 10.1016/j.dld.2017.01.161 28254463 10 Neurath M.F. Current and emerging therapeutic targets for IBD Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 14 2017 269 278 10.1038/nrgastro.2016.208 28144028 11 Lin Q. Hao W.J. Zhou R.M. Huang C.L. Wang X.Y. Liu Y.S. Li X.Z. Pretreatment with Bifidobacterium longum BAA2573 ameliorates dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis by modulating gut microbiota Front. Microbiol. 14 2023 1211259 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1211259 37346749 PMC10280014 12 Ganesh B.P. Hall A. Ayyaswamy S. Nelson J.W. Fultz R. Major A. Haag A. Esparza M. Lugo M. Venable S. Diacylglycerol kinase synthesized by commensal Lactobacillus reuteri diminishes protein kinase C phosphorylation and histamine-mediated signaling in the mammalian intestinal epithelium Mucosal Immunol. 11 2018 380 393 10.1038/mi.2017.58 28745328 PMC5785580 13 He L. Zhou X. Liu Y. Zhou L. Li F. Fecal miR-142a-3p from dextran sulfate sodium-challenge recovered mice prevents colitis by promoting the growth of Lactobacilus reuteri Mol. Ther. 30 2022 388 399 10.1016/j.ymthe.2021.08.025 34450255 PMC8753372 14 Xie W. Song L. Wang X. Xu Y. Liu Z. Zhao D. Wang S. Fan X. Wang Z. Gao C. A bovine lactoferricin-lactoferrampin-encoding Lactobacillus reuteri CO21 regulates the intestinal mucosal immunity and enhances the protection of piglets against enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli K88 challenge Gut Microbes 13 2021 1956281 10.1080/19490976.2021.1956281 34369287 PMC8354667 15 Toyofuku M. Nomura N. Eberl L. Types and origins of bacterial membrane vesicles Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 17 2019 13 24 10.1038/s41579-018-0112-2 30397270 16 Fuhrmann G. Diffusion and transport of extracellular vesicles Nat. Nanotechnol. 15 2020 168 169 10.1038/s41565-020-0651-3 32066903 17 Chronopoulos A. Kalluri R. Emerging role of bacterial extracellular vesicles in cancer Oncogene 39 2020 6951 6960 10.1038/s41388-020-01509-3 33060855 PMC7557313 18 Toyofuku M. Schild S. Kaparakis-Liaskos M. Eberl L. Composition and functions of bacterial membrane vesicles Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 21 2023 415 430 10.1038/s41579-023-00875-5 36932221 19 Díaz-Garrido N. Badia J. Baldomà L. Microbiota-derived extracellular vesicles in interkingdom communication in the gut J. Extracell. Vesicles 10 2021 e12161 10.1002/jev2.12161 34738337 PMC8568775 20 Li N. Niu L. Liu Y. Wang Y. Su X. Xu C. Sun Z. Guo H. Gong J. Shen S. Taking SCFAs produced by Lactobacillus reuteri orally reshapes gut microbiota and elicits antitumor responses J. Nanobiotechnol. 22 2024 241 10.1186/s12951-024-02506-4 PMC11089779 38735933 21 Song W.F. Yao W.Q. Chen Q.W. Zheng D. Han Z.Y. Zhang X.Z. In Situ Bioorthogonal Conjugation of Delivered Bacteria with Gut Inhabitants for Enhancing Probiotics Colonization ACS Cent. Sci. 8 2022 1306 1317 10.1021/acscentsci.2c00533 36188344 PMC9523781 22 Liang L. Yang C. Liu L. Mai G. Li H. Wu L. Jin M. Chen Y. Commensal bacteria-derived extracellular vesicles suppress ulcerative colitis through regulating the macrophages polarization and remodeling the gut microbiota Microb. Cell Fact. 21 2022 88 10.1186/s12934-022-01812-6 35578339 PMC9109417 23 Taherkhani S. Mohammadi M. Daoud J. Martel S. Tabrizian M. Covalent Binding of Nanoliposomes to the Surface of Magnetotactic Bacteria for the Synthesis of Self-Propelled Therapeutic Agents ACS Nano 8 2014 5049 5060 10.1021/nn5011304 24684397 24 Han F. Wang K. Shen K. Wang J. Han S. Hu D. Wu G. Extracellular vesicles from Lactobacillus druckerii inhibit hypertrophic scar fibrosis J. Nanobiotechnol. 21 2023 113 10.1186/s12951-023-01861-y PMC10053340 36978136 25 Kuhn T. Aljohmani A. Frank N. Zielke L. Mehanny M. Laschke M.W. Koch M. Hoppstädter J. Kiemer A.K. Yildiz D. Fuhrmann G. A cell-free, biomimetic hydrogel based on probiotic membrane vesicles ameliorates wound healing J. Contr. Release 365 2024 969 980 10.1016/j.jconrel.2023.12.011 38070602 26 Kapoore R.V. Padmaperuma G. Maneein S. Vaidyanathan S. Co-culturing microbial consortia: approaches for applications in biomanufacturing and bioprocessing Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 42 2022 46 72 10.1080/07388551.2021.1921691 33980092 27 Peng H. Darlington A.P.S. South E.J. Chen H.H. Jiang W. Ledesma-Amaro R. A molecular toolkit of cross-feeding strains for engineering synthetic yeast communities Nat. Microbiol. 9 2024 848 863 10.1038/s41564-023-01596-4 38326570 PMC10914607 28 Culp E.J. Goodman A.L. Cross-feeding in the gut microbiome: Ecology and mechanisms Cell Host Microbe 31 2023 485 499 10.1016/j.chom.2023.03.016 37054671 PMC10125260 29 Huang Q.X. Liang J.L. Yang C.H. Li K. Niu M.T. Fan J.X. Zhang X.Z. Stimulation-responsive mucoadhesive probiotics for inflammatory bowel disease treatment by scavenging reactive oxygen species and regulating gut microbiota Biomaterials 301 2023 122274 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2023.122274 37586233 30 Tratenšek A. Locatelli I. Grabnar I. Drobne D. Vovk T. Oxidative stress-related biomarkers as promising indicators of inflammatory bowel disease activity: A systematic review and meta-analysis Redox Biol. 77 2024 103380 10.1016/j.redox.2024.103380 39368456 PMC11490685 31 Jing S. Chen H. Liu E. Zhang M. Zeng F. Shen H. Fang Y. Muhitdinov B. Huang Y. Oral pectin/oligochitosan microspheres for colon-specific controlled release of quercetin to treat inflammatory bowel disease Carbohydr. Polym. 316 2023 121025 10.1016/j.carbpol.2023.121025 37321723 32 Rooban B.N. Sasikala V. Gayathri Devi V. Sahasranamam V. Abraham A. Prevention of selenite induced oxidative stress and cataractogenesis by luteolin isolated from Vitex negundo Chem. Biol. Interact. 196 2012 30 38 10.1016/j.cbi.2012.01.005 22342831 33 Radulovic K. Normand S. Rehman A. Delanoye-Crespin A. Chatagnon J. Delacre M. Waldschmitt N. Poulin L.F. Iovanna J. Ryffel B. A dietary flavone confers communicable protection against colitis through NLRP6 signaling independently of inflammasome activation Mucosal Immunol. 11 2018 811 819 10.1038/mi.2017.87 29139477 34 Xue L. Jin X. Ji T. Li R. Zhuge X. Xu F. Quan Z. Tong H. Yu W. Luteolin ameliorates DSS-induced colitis in mice via suppressing macrophage activation and chemotaxis Int. Immunopharmacol. 124 2023 110996 10.1016/j.intimp.2023.110996 37776768 35 Zuo T. Yue Y. Wang X. Li H. Yan S. Luteolin Relieved DSS-Induced Colitis in Mice via HMGB1-TLR-NF-κB Signaling Pathway Inflammation 44 2021 570 579 10.1007/s10753-020-01354-2 33015735 36 Fang Z. Bhandari B. Effect of spray drying and storage on the stability of bayberry polyphenols Food Chem. 129 2011 1139 1147 10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.05.093 25212349 37 Zhang C. Yan L. Wang X. Zhu S. Chen C. Gu Z. Zhao Y. Progress, challenges, and future of nanomedicine Nano Today 35 2020 101008 10.1016/j.nantod.2020.101008 38 Rahaiee S. Assadpour E. Esfanjani A.F. Silva A.S. Jafari S.M. Application of nano/microencapsulated phenolic compounds against cancer Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 279 2020 15 10.1016/j.cis.2020.102153 32289738 39 Mokhtari S. Jafari S.M. Khomeiri M. Maghsoudlou Y. Ghorbani M. The cell wall compound of Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a novel wall material for encapsulation of probiotics Food Res. Int. 96 2017 19 26 10.1016/j.foodres.2017.03.014 28528098 40 Reiner A.T. Somoza V. Extracellular Vesicles as Vehicles for the Delivery of Food Bioactives J. Agric. Food Chem. 67 2019 2113 2119 10.1021/acs.jafc.8b06369 30688074 41 Gabrielli N. Maganteve C. Kafkia E. Rettel M. Loeffler J. Kamrad S. Typas A. Patil K.R. Unravelling metabolic crossfeeding in a yeastbacteria community using 13Cbased proteomics Mol. Syst. Biol. 19 2023 10.15252/msb.202211501 PMC10090948 36779294 42 Shi M. McQuillan J. Evans C. Liu Y. Lin X.N. Barney B. Pandhal J. Characterising complex metabolic responses in an engineered, cross-feeding microbial co-culture using quantitative proteomics N. Biotech. 93 2026 9 20 10.1016/j.nbt.2026.02.001 PMC13179865 41651114 43 Yakabe K. Higashi S. Akiyama M. Mori H. Murakami T. Toyoda A. Sugiyama Y. Kishino S. Okano K. Hirayama A. Dietary-protein sources modulate host susceptibility to Clostridioides difficile infection through the gut microbiota Cell Rep. 40 2022 111332 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111332 36103838 44 Morishita M. Horita M. Higuchi A. Marui M. Katsumi H. Yamamoto A. Characterizing Different Probiotic-Derived Extracellular Vesicles as a Novel Adjuvant for Immunotherapy Mol. Pharm. 18 2021 1080 1092 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.0c01011 33554596 45 Mandelbaum N. Zhang L. Carasso S. Ziv T. Lifshiz-Simon S. Davidovich I. Luz I. Berinstein E. Gefen T. Cooks T. Extracellular vesicles of the Gram-positive gut symbiont Bifidobacterium longum induce immune-modulatory, anti-inflammatory effects npj Biofilms Microbiomes 9 2023 30 10.1038/s41522-023-00400-9 37270554 PMC10239484 46 Ma L. Shen Q. Lyu W. Lv L. Wang W. Yu M. Yang H. Tao S. Xiao Y. Clostridium butyricum and Its Derived Extracellular Vesicles Modulate Gut Homeostasis and Ameliorate Acute Experimental Colitis Microbiol. Spectr. 10 2022 e0136822 10.1128/spectrum.01368-22 35762770 PMC9431305 47 Han H.S. Hwang S. Choi S.Y. Hitayezu E. Humphrey M.A. Enkhbayar A. Song D.G. Kim M. Park J.S. Park Y.T. Roseburia intestinalis-derived extracellular vesicles ameliorate colitis by modulating intestinal barrier, microbiome, and inflammatory responses J. Extracell. Vesicles 13 2024 e12487 10.1002/jev2.12487 39166405 PMC11336657 48 Jiang B. Adams Z. Moonah S. Shi H. Maupin-Furlow J. Moskovitz J. The Antioxidant Enzyme Methionine Sulfoxide Reductase A (MsrA) Interacts with Jab1/CSN5 and Regulates Its Function Antioxidants 9 2020 452 10.3390/antiox9050452 32456285 PMC7278660 49 Lim J.C. You Z. Kim G. Levine R.L. Methionine sulfoxide reductase A is a stereospecific methionine oxidase Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108 2011 10472 10477 10.1073/pnas.1101275108 21670260 PMC3127874 50 Jang Y.J. Cha B.S. Kim D. Lee E.S. Kim S. Han J. Shin J. Kim S. Park K.S. Extracellular Vesicles, as Drug-Delivery Vehicles, Improve the Biological Activities of Astaxanthin Antioxidants 12 2023 473 10.3390/antiox12020473 36830031 PMC9952194 51 Abidin L. Mujeeb M. Imam S.S. Aqil M. Khurana D. Enhanced transdermal delivery of luteolin via non-ionic surfactant-based vesicle: quality evaluation and anti-arthritic assessment Drug Deliv. 23 2016 1069 1074 10.3109/10717544.2014.945130 25116512 52 Shi M. Chen Z. Gong H. Peng Z. Sun Q. Luo K. Wu B. Wen C. Lin W. Luteolin, a flavone ingredient: Anticancer mechanisms, combined medication strategy, pharmacokinetics, clinical trials, and pharmaceutical researches Phytother Res. 38 2024 880 911 10.1002/ptr.8066 38088265 53 Liang D. Liu C. Li Y. Wu C. Chen Y. Tan M. Su W. Engineering fucoxanthin-loaded probiotics? membrane vesicles for the dietary intervention of colitis Biomaterials 297 2023 122107 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2023.122107 37058897 54 Gao X. Liu Z. Chen J. Zhu D. Liu H. Li J. Zhao X. Mi H. Encapsulation of luteolin by self-assembled Rha/SSPS/SPI nano complexes: Characterization, stability, and gastrointestinal digestion in vitro Food Res. Int. 188 2024 114532 10.1016/j.foodres.2024.114532 38823889 55 Tan C. Fan H. Ding J. Han C. Guan Y. Zhu F. Wu H. Liu Y. Zhang W. Hou X. ROS-responsive nanoparticles for oral delivery of luteolin and targeted therapy of ulcerative colitis by regulating pathological microenvironment Mater. Today Bio 14 2022 100246 10.1016/j.mtbio.2022.100246 PMC8965165 35372817 56 Prasher P. Sharma M. Singh S.K. Gulati M. Chellappan D.K. Zacconi F. De Rubis G. Gupta G. Sharifi-Rad J. Cho W.C. Dua K. Luteolin: a flavonoid with a multifaceted anticancer potential Cancer Cell Int. 22 2022 386 10.1186/s12935-022-02808-3 36482329 PMC9730645 57 Wang Z. Shen J. The role of goblet cells in Crohn' s disease Cell Biosci. 14 2024 43 10.1186/s13578-024-01220-w 38561835 PMC10985922 58 Gustafsson J.K. Johansson M.E.V. The role of goblet cells and mucus in intestinal homeostasis Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 19 2022 785 803 10.1038/s41575-022-00675-x 36097076 59 Liu Y. Yu X. Zhao J. Zhang H. Zhai Q. Chen W. The role of MUC2 mucin in intestinal homeostasis and the impact of dietary components on MUC2 expression Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 164 2020 884 891 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.07.191 32707285 60 Zhao Y. He R. Zang J. Yin W. Su R. Xiong W. Xu W. Zhang J. Liu Y. Ren T. Pathologically catalyzed physical coating restores the intestinal barrier for inflammatory bowel disease therapy J. Nanobiotechnol. 21 2023 444 10.1186/s12951-023-02227-0 PMC10668504 37996883 61 Chelakkot C. Ghim J. Ryu S.H. Mechanisms regulating intestinal barrier integrity and its pathological implications Exp. Mol. Med. 50 2018 1 9 10.1038/s12276-018-0126-x PMC6095905 30115904 62 Fu W. Huang Z. Li W. Xu L. Yang M. Ma Y. Liu H. Qian H. Wang W. Copper-luteolin nanocomplexes for Mediating multifaceted regulation of oxidative stress, intestinal barrier, and gut microbiota in inflammatory bowel disease Bioact. Mater. 46 2025 118 133 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2024.12.004 39760067 PMC11697280 63 Furman D. Campisi J. Verdin E. Carrera-Bastos P. Targ S. Franceschi C. Ferrucci L. Gilroy D.W. Fasano A. Miller G.W. Chronic inflammation in the etiology of disease across the life span Nat. Med. 25 2019 1822 1832 10.1038/s41591-019-0675-0 31806905 PMC7147972 64 Fang G. Kong F. Zhang H. Huang B. Zhang J. Zhang X. Association between inflammatory bowel disease and interleukins, chemokines: a two-sample bidirectional mendelian randomization study Front. Immunol. 14 2023 1168188 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1168188 37228614 PMC10203949 65 Gong W. Liu Z. Wang Y. Huang W. Yang K. Gao Z. Guo K. Xiao Z. Zhao W. Reprogramming of Treg cell-derived small extracellular vesicles effectively prevents intestinal inflammation from PANoptosis by blocking mitochondrial oxidative stress Trends Biotechnol. 43 2025 893 917 10.1016/j.tibtech.2024.11.017 39689981 66 Ning L. Zhou Y.L. Sun H. Zhang Y. Shen C. Wang Z. Xuan B. Zhao Y. Ma Y. Yan Y. Microbiome and metabolome features in inflammatory bowel disease via multi-omics integration analyses across cohorts Nat. Commun. 14 2023 7135 10.1038/s41467-023-42788-0 37932270 PMC10628233 67 Ni J. Wu G.D. Albenberg L. Tomov V.T. Gut microbiota and IBD: causation or correlation? Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 14 2017 573 584 10.1038/nrgastro.2017.88 28743984 PMC5880536 68 Shin N.R. Whon T.W. Bae J.W. Proteobacteria: microbial signature of dysbiosis in gut microbiota Trends Biotechnol. 33 2015 496 503 10.1016/j.tibtech.2015.06.011 26210164 69 Stojanov S. Berlec A. Štrukelj B. The Influence of Probiotics on the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes Ratio in the Treatment of Obesity and Inflammatory Bowel disease Microorganisms 8 2020 1715 10.3390/microorganisms8111715 33139627 PMC7692443 70 Yu Z. Li D. Sun H. Herba Origani alleviated DSS-induced ulcerative colitis in mice through remolding gut microbiota to regulate bile acid and short-chain fatty acid metabolisms Biomed. Pharmacother. 161 2023 114409 10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114409 36822021 71 Shi Y.J. Sheng K.W. Zhao H.N. Liu C. Wang H. Toll-Like Receptor 2 Deficiency Exacerbates Dextran Sodium Sulfate-Induced Intestinal Injury through Marinifilaceae-Dependent Attenuation of Cell Cycle Signaling Front. Biosci. 29 2024 338 10.31083/j.fbl2909338 39344335 72 Konikoff T. Gophna U. Oscillospira : a Central, Enigmatic Component of the Human Gut Micropiota Trends Microbiol. 24 2016 523 524 10.1016/j.tim.2016.02.015 26996766 73 Zhang S. Nie Q. Sun Y. Zuo S. Chen C. Li S. Yang J. Hu J. Zhou X. Yu Y. Bacteroides uniformis degrades β-glucan to promote Lactobacillus johnsonii improving indole-3-lactic acid levels in alleviating colitis Microbiome 12 2024 177 10.1186/s40168-024-01896-9 39300532 PMC11414225 74 Holmberg S.M. Feeney R.H. Vishnu P.P.K. Fabiola P.B. Singh D.K. Wongkuna S. Zandbergen L. Hauner H. Brandl B. Nieminen A.I. The gut commensal Blautia maintains colonic mucus function under low-fiber consumption through secretion of short-chain fatty acids Nature 15 2024 3502 10.1038/s41467-024-47594-w PMC11045866 38664378 75 Vacca M. Celano G. Calabrese F.M. Portincasa P. Gobbetti M. De Angelis M. The Controversial Role of Human Gut Lachnospiraceae Microorganisms 8 2020 573 10.3390/microorganisms8040573 32326636 PMC7232163 76 Liu X. Mao B. Gu J. Wu J. Cui S. Wang G. Zhao J. Zhang H. Chen W. Blautia—a new functional genus with potential probiotic properties? Gut Microbes 13 2021 1 21 10.1080/19490976.2021.1875796 PMC7872077 33525961 77 Yuan J. Che S. Zhang L. Ruan Z. Reparative Effects of Ethanol-Induced Intestinal Barrier Injury by Flavonoid Luteolin via MAPK/NF-κB/MLCK and Nrf2 Signaling Pathways J. Agric. Food Chem. 69 2021 4101 4110 10.1021/acs.jafc.1c00199 33749262 78 Xie X. Zhao M. Huang S. Li P. Chen P. Luo X. Wang Q. Pan Z. Li X. Chen J. Luteolin alleviates ulcerative colitis by restoring the balance of NCR(-)ILC3/NCR(+)ILC3 to repairing impaired intestinal barrier Int. Immunopharmacol. 112 2022 109251 10.1016/j.intimp.2022.109251 36182875 79 Sacks D. Baxter B. Campbell B.C.V. Carpenter J.S. Cognard C. Dippel D. Eesa M. Fischer U. Hausegger K. Hirsch J.A. From the American Association of Neurological Surgeons AANS American Society of Neuroradiology ASNR Cardiovascular and Interventional Radiology Society of Europe CIRSE Canadian Interventional Radiology Association CIRA Congress of Neurological Surgeons CNS European Society of Minimally Invasive Neurological Therapy ESMINT European Society of Neuroradiology ESNR European Stroke Organization ESO Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions SCAI Society of Interventional Radiology SIR Society of NeuroInterventional Surgery SNIS and World Stroke Organization WSO Multisociety Consensus Quality Improvement Revised Consensus Statement for Endovascular Therapy of Acute Ischemic Stroke Int. J. Stroke 13 2018 612 632 10.1177/1747493018778713 29786478 80 Yue N. Zhao H. Hu P. Zhang Y. Tian C. Kong C. Mai Z. Huang L. Luo Q. Wei D. Real-world of Limosilactobacillus reuteri in mitigation of acute experimental colitis J. Nanobiotechnol. 23 2025 65 10.1186/s12951-025-03158-8 PMC11783912 39891249 81 Durant L. Stentz R. Noble A. Brooks J. Gicheva N. Reddi D. O'Connor M.J. Hoyles L. McCartney A.L. Man R. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron-derived outer membrane vesicles promote regulatory dendritic cell responses in health but not in inflammatory bowel disease Microbiome 8 2020 88 10.1186/s40168-020-00868-z 32513301 PMC7282036 82 Rubio A.P.D. Martínez J. Palavecino M. Fuentes F. López C.M.S. Marcilla A. Pérez O.E. Piuri M. Transcytosis of Bacillus subtilis extracellular vesicles through an in vitro intestinal epithelial cell model Sci. Rep. 10 2020 3120 10.1038/s41598-020-60077-4 32080346 PMC7033168 83 Chen T. Ma J. Liu Y. Chen Z. Xiao N. Lu Y. Fu Y. Yang C. Li M. Wu S. iProX in 2021: connecting proteomics data sharing with big data Nucleic Acids Res. 50 2022 D1522 D1527 10.1093/nar/gkab1081 34871441 PMC8728291 84 Lee C.Y. Lai T.Y. Tsai M.K. Chang Y.C. Ho Y.H. Yu I.S. Yeh T.W. Chou C.C. Lin Y.S. Lawrence T. Hsu L.C. The ubiquitin ligase ZNRF1 promotes caveolin-1 ubiquitination and degradation to modulate inflammation Nat. Commun. 8 2017 15502 10.1038/ncomms15502 PMC5472178 28593998 85 Zhang C. Wang C. Dai J. Xiu Z. The inhibition mechanism of co-cultured probiotics on biofilm formation of Klebsiella pneumoniae J. Appl. Microbiol. 135 2024 lxae138 10.1093/jambio/lxae138 38857885 86 Maroto R. Zhao Y. Jamaluddin M. Popov V.L. Wang H. Kalubowilage M. Zhang Y. Luisi J. Sun H. Culbertson C.T. Effects of storage temperature on airway exosome integrity for diagnostic and functional analyses J. Extracell. Vesicles 6 2017 1359478 10.1080/20013078.2017.1359478 28819550 PMC5556670 87 Wu S. Wang K. Lv Q. Tan M. Enhanced therapeutic intervention of curcumin loaded in exosomes derived from milk in alleviating retinal pigment epithelial cells damage Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 245 2025 114325 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2024.114325 39432927 88 Li J. Li Y. Zhang X. Miao S. Tan M. Su W. Microfluidic spinning of fucoxanthin-loaded nanofibers for enhancing antioxidation and clarification of fruit juice Food Funct. 13 2022 1472 1481 10.1039/d1fo03766h 35050292 89 Cooper H.S. Murthy S.N. Shah R.S. Sedergran D.J. Clinicopathologic study of dextran sulfate sodium experimental murine colitis Lab. Invest. 69 1993 238 249 8350599 90 Butzner J.D. Parmar R. Bell C.J. Dalal V. Butyrate enema therapy stimulates mucosal repair in experimental colitis in the rat Gut 38 1996 568 573 10.1136/gut.38.4.568 8707089 PMC1383116 91 Silva A.P.E. Lourenço A.L. Marmello B.O. Bitteti M. Teixeira G.A.P.B. Comparison of two techniques for a comprehensive gut histopathological analysis: Swiss Roll versus Intestine Strips Exp. Mol. Pathol. 111 2019 8 10.1016/j.yexmp.2019.104302 31465765 Supplemental information 
 Document S1. Figures S1–S10 
 Table S1. Exact p values for Figure 1 
 Table S2. Exact p values for Figure 2 
 Table S3. Exact p values for Figure 3 
 Table S4. Exact p values for Figure 4 
 Table S5. Exact p values for Figure 6 
 Table S6. Exact p values for Figure 7 
 Table S7. Exact p values for Figure 8 
 Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2026.117105 .

===== SUPPLEMENTARY FILE TEXT (PMID:42604006) =====

Cached by scripts/cache_supplements.py (#653). This is SUPPLEMENTARY text,
not the article body: validate-references matches snippets against the
article cache, so nothing here is a substitute for it.

Members:
  - ga1.gif: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - ga1.jpg: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr1.gif: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr1.jpg: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr2.gif: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr2.jpg: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr3.gif: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr3.jpg: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr4.gif: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr4.jpg: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr5.gif: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr5.jpg: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr6.gif: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr6.jpg: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr7.gif: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr7.jpg: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr8.gif: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - gr8.jpg: SKIPPED (binary/image, no prose)
  - mmc1.pdf: SKIPPED (PDF not extracted (no PDF text extractor in this repo))
  - mmc2.xlsx: 1203 chars
  - mmc3.xlsx: 813 chars
  - mmc4.xlsx: 538 chars
  - mmc5.xlsx: 382 chars
  - mmc6.xlsx: 1167 chars
  - mmc7.xlsx: 1722 chars
  - mmc8.xlsx: 740 chars

----- mmc2.xlsx -----
### Sheet1

Table S1. Exact p values for Figure 1A


B. longum
C. butyricum
L. reuteri
B+C
B+L
L+C
B+C+L

B. longum
ND
0.9995
<0.0001
0.0037
0.677
0.0076
<0.0001

C. butyricum

ND
<0.0001
0.0078
0.4401
0.0162
<0.0001

L. reuteri


ND
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001

B+C



ND
0.0002
0.9996
<0.0001

B+L




ND
0.0004
<0.0001

L+C





ND
<0.0001

B+C+L






ND

Exact p values for Figure 1B


B
B+C（CFS）
B+L（CFS）


C
C+B（CFS）
C+L（CFS）


L
L+B(CFS)
L+C(CFS)

B
ND



C
ND



L
ND

B+C（CFS）
<0.0001
ND


C+B（CFS）
<0.0001
ND


L+B(CFS)
<0.0001
ND

B+L（CFS）
0.0581
<0.0001
ND

C+L（CFS）
<0.0001
0.8138
ND

L+C(CFS)
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND

Exact p values for Figure 1J

0.2mg/mL
B-EVs
C-EVs
L-EVs
M-EVs

0.4mg/mL
B-EVs
C-EVs
L-EVs
M-EVs

B-EVs
ND




B-EVs
ND

C-EVs
0.4783
ND



C-EVs
0.0438
ND

L-EVs
0.0093
0.1546
ND


L-EVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND

M-EVs
0.171
0.8908
0.4448
ND

M-EVs
<0.0001
0.0006
0.0171
ND

Exact p values for Figure 1K

0.2mg/mL
B-EVs
C-EVs
L-EVs
M-EVs

0.4mg/mL
B-EVs
C-EVs
L-EVs
M-EVs

B-EVs
ND




B-EVs
ND

C-EVs
0.9977
ND



C-EVs
0.1122
ND

L-EVs
0.9687
0.9192
ND


L-EVs
0.3288
0.9075
ND

M-EVs
0.2997
0.2265
0.5338
ND

M-EVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND
























Lut-EVs

----- mmc3.xlsx -----
### Sheet1

Table S2. Exact p values for Figure 2J

200
EVs
Lut
Lut-EVs

400
EVs
Lut
Lut-EVs

600
EVs
Lut
Lut-EVs

800
EVs
Lut
Lut-EVs

1000
EVs
Lut
Lut-EVs

EVs
ND



EVs
ND



EVs
ND



EVs
ND



EVs
ND

Lut
<0.0001
ND


Lut
<0.0001
ND


Lut
<0.0001
ND


Lut
<0.0001
ND


Lut
0.5197
ND

Lut-EVs
<0.0001
0.3693
ND

Lut-EVs
<0.0001
0.0565
ND

Lut-EVs
<0.0001
0.7726
ND

Lut-EVs
<0.0001
0.753
ND

Lut-EVs
0.3347
0.9401
ND

Exact p values for Figure 2K

200
EVs
Lut
Lut-EVs

400
EVs
Lut
Lut-EVs

600
EVs
Lut
Lut-EVs

800
EVs
Lut
Lut-EVs

1000
EVs
Lut

EVs
ND



EVs
ND



EVs
ND



EVs
ND



EVs
ND

Lut
<0.0001
ND


Lut
<0.0001
ND


Lut
<0.0001
ND


Lut
<0.0001
ND


Lut
0.9139
ND

Lut-EVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND

Lut-EVs
<0.0001
0.9128
ND

Lut-EVs
<0.0001
0.8812
ND

Lut-EVs
<0.0001
0.956
ND

Lut-EVs
0.6978
0.9124
ND

----- mmc4.xlsx -----
### Sheet1

Table S3. Exact p values for Figure 3A

M-MVs
0
10
25
50
100
150
200

0
ND

10
>0.9999
ND

25
0.6514
0.4853
ND

50
0.1836
0.1149
0.9482
ND

100
0.0821
0.0495
0.7545
0.9987
ND

150
0.0001
<0.0001
0.0018
0.0103
0.025
ND

200
0.0002
0.0001
0.0034
0.0207
0.0496
0.9997
ND

Exact p values for Figure 3B

Lut-MVs
0
10
25
50
100
150
200

0
ND

10
>0.9999
ND

25
0.861
0.9374
ND

50
0.9769
0.9953
0.9994
ND

100
0.4439
0.3336
0.0639
0.1315
ND

150
0.9997
>0.9999
0.9682
0.9989
0.273
ND

200
0.844
0.9264
>0.9999
0.999
0.0597
0.9611
ND

----- mmc5.xlsx -----
### Sheet1

Table S4. Exact p values for Figure 4E

Colon length
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

NC
ND

DSS
<0.0001
ND

M-MVs
0.0014
0.1833
ND

Lut
<0.0001
0.9991
0.1279
ND

Lut-MVs
0.0241
0.0094
0.3561
0.0066
ND

Exact p values for Figure 4F

CMDI
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

NC
ND

DSS
<0.0001
ND

M-MVs
0.0116
0.0041
ND

Lut
<0.0001
0.9502
0.0116
ND

Lut-MVs
0.283
0.0003
0.283
0.0006
ND

----- mmc6.xlsx -----
### Sheet1

Table S5 Exact p values for Figure 6F






Exact p values for Figure 6G






Exact p values for Figure 6H

MUC2
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

ZO-1
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

Occ
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

NC
ND





NC
ND





NC
ND

DSS
0.0064
ND




DSS
<0.0001
ND




DSS
0.0064
ND

M-MVs
0.0006
<0.0001
ND



M-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND



M-MVs
0.0009
<0.0001
ND

Lut
0.9987
0.0033
0.0011
ND


Lut
0.9998
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND


Lut
0.9977
0.0136
0.0004
ND

Lut-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
0.7544
<0.0001
ND

Lut-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
0.0789
<0.0001
ND

Lut-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
0.0744
<0.0001
ND

Exact p values for Figure 6I






Exact p values for Figure 6J






Exact p values for Figure 6K

MUC2
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

ZO-1
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

Occ
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

NC
ND





NC
ND





NC
ND

DSS
<0.0001
ND




DSS
0.0527
ND




DSS
0.0128
ND

M-MVs
0.0002
<0.0001
ND



M-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND



M-MVs
0.0007
<0.0001
ND

Lut
0.3384
<0.0001
0.0025
ND


Lut
0.5924
0.0055
<0.0001
ND


Lut
0.0002
<0.0001
0.8575
ND

Lut-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND

Lut-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND

Lut-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
0.0001
0.0003
ND

----- mmc7.xlsx -----
### Sheet1

Table S6 Exact p values for Figure 7A






Exact p values for Figure 7B






Exact p values for Figure 7C

MPO
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

CAT
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

SOD
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

NC
ND





NC
ND





NC
ND

DSS
<0.0001
ND




DSS
0.0118
ND




DSS
<0.0001
ND

M-MVs
0.9063
<0.0001
ND



M-MVs
>0.9999
0.0126
ND



M-MVs
0.0026
0.0022
ND

Lut
0.0128
0.003
0.0481
ND


Lut
0.0513
0.8703
0.0545
ND


Lut
<0.0001
0.8712
0.0086
ND

Lut-MVs
0.9996
<0.0001
0.9601
0.0172
ND

Lut-MVs
0.9713
0.0048
0.9642
0.0201
ND

Lut-MVs
0.6172
<0.0001
0.0221
<0.0001
ND

Exact p values for Figure 7D






Exact p values for Figure 7E






Exact p values for Figure 7F

GSH
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

MDA
NC
Dss
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

NO
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

NC
ND





NC
ND





NC
ND

DSS
<0.0001
ND




Dss
<0.0001
ND




DSS
<0.0001
ND

M-MVs
0.0231
<0.0001
ND



M-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND



M-MVs
0.0013
<0.0001
ND

Lut
0.7577
0.0001
0.0039
ND


Lut
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND


Lut
<0.0001
<0.0001
0.0315
ND

Lut-MVs
0.0017
<0.0001
0.4295
0.0004
ND

Lut-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND

Lut-MVs
0.8382
<0.0001
0.0056
<0.0001
ND

Exact p values for Figure 7G






Exact p values for Figure 7H






Exact p values for Figure 7I

TNF-α
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

IL-6
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

IL-10
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

NC
ND





NC
ND





NC
ND

DSS
0.0144
ND




DSS
<0.0001
ND




DSS
0.9961
ND

M-MVs
0.956
0.0052
ND



M-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND



M-MVs
0.0526
0.0304
ND

Lut
0.7366
0.0024
0.9799
ND


Lut
<0.0001
<0.0001
0.0001
ND


Lut
0.8035
0.9402
0.0097
ND

Lut-MVs
0.1903
0.0005
0.4618
0.7628
ND

Lut-MVs
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
ND

Lut-MVs
0.0019
0.0012
0.2441
0.0005
ND

----- mmc8.xlsx -----
### Sheet1

Table S7 Exact p values for Figure 8C






Exact p values for Figure 8D

F/B
NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs


NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

NC
ND





NC
ND

DSS
0.001
ND




DSS
0.2358
ND

M-MVs
0.0315
0.2019
ND



M-MVs
0.942
0.5758
ND

Lut
0.0098
0.5274
0.9356
ND


Lut
0.1883
0.9998
0.4882
ND

Lut-MVs
0.2518
0.0246
0.6513
0.2741
ND

Lut-MVs
>0.9999
0.2826
0.9708
0.2273
ND

Exact p values for Figure 8G






Exact p values for Figure 8H


NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs


NC
DSS
M-MVs
Lut
Lut-MVs

NC
ND





NC
ND

DSS
0.9877
ND




DSS
>0.9999
ND

M-MVs
0.3829
0.6372
ND



M-MVs
0.6509
0.7215
ND

Lut
0.3482
0.5938
>0.9999
ND


Lut
0.8338
0.8873
0.9963
ND

Lut-MVs
0.0035
0.0069
0.0595
0.067
ND

Lut-MVs
0.3974
0.4605
0.9883
0.9188
ND
